foundation and earth    by isaac asimov      chapter i  the search begins    .    why did i do it .   asked golan trevize .   it wasn t a new question .  since he had arrived at gaia  he had asked it of himself frequently .  he would wake up from a sound sleep in the pleasant coolness of the night and find the question sounding noiselessly in his mind  like a tiny drumbeat  why did i do it .  why did i do it .   now  though  for the first time  he managed to ask it of dom  the ancient of gaia .   dom was well aware of trevize s tension for he could sense the fabric of the councilman s mind .  he did not respond to it .  gaia must in no way ever touch trevize s mind  and the best way of remaining immune to the temptation was to painstakingly ignore what he sensed .    do what  trev .   he asked .  he found it difficult to use more than one syllable in addressing a person  and it didn t matter .  trevize was growing somewhat used to that .    the decision i made   said trevize .   choosing gaia as the future .     you were right to do so   said dom  seated  his aged deep set eyes looking earnestly up at the man of the foundation  who was standing .    you say i am right   said trevize impatiently .    i we gaia know you are .  that s your worth to us .  you have the capacity for making the right decision on incomplete data  and you have made the decision .  you chose gaia .  you rejected the anarchy of a galactic empire built on the technology of the first foundation  as well as the anarchy of a galactic empire built on the mentalics of the second foundation .  you decided that neither could be long stable .  so you chose gaia .     yes   said trevize .   exactly .  i chose gaia  a superorganism  a whole planet with a mind and personality in common  so that one has to say  i we  gaia  as an invented pronoun to express the inexpressible .   he paced the floor restlessly .   and it will become eventually galaxia  a super superorganism embracing all the swarm of the milky way .    he stopped  turned almost savagely on dom  and said   i feel i m right  as you feel it  but you want the coming of galaxia  and so are satisfied with the id on .  there s something in me  however  that doesn t want it  and for that reason i m not satisfied to accept the rightness so easily .  i want to know why i made the decision  i want to weigh and judge the rightness and be satisfied with it .  merely feeling right isn t enough .  how can i know i am right .  what b the device that makes me right .     i we gaia do not know how it is that you come to the right decision .  is it important to know that as long as we have the decision .     you speak for the whole planet  do you .  for the common consciousness of every dewdrop  of every pebble  of even the liquid central core of the planet .     i do  and so can any portion of the planet in which the intensity of the common consciousness is great enough .     and is all this common consciousness satisfied to use me as a black box .  since the black box works  is it unimportant to know what is inside .   that doesn t suit me .  i don t enjoy being a black box .  i want to know what s inside .  i want to know how and why i chose gaia and galaxia as the future  so that i can rest and be at peace .     but why do you dislike or distrust your decision so .    trevize drew a deep breath and said slowly  in a low and forceful voice   because i don t want to be part of a superorganism .  i don t want to be a dispensable part to be done away with whenever the superorganism judges that doing away would be for the good of the whole .    dom looked at trevize thoughtfully .   do you want to change your decision  then  trev .  you can  you know .     i long to change the decision  but i can t do that merely because i dislike it .  to do something now  i have to know whether the decision is wrong or right .  it s not enough merely to feel it s right .     if you feel you are right  you are right .   always that slow  gentle voice that somehow made trevize feel wilder by its very contrast with his own inner turmoil .   then trevize said  in half a whisper  breaking out of the insoluble oscillation between feeling and knowing   i must find earth .     because it has something to do with this passionate need of yours to know .     because it is another problem that troubles me unbearably and because i fuel there is a connection between the two .  am i not a black box .  i feel there is a connection .  isn t that enough to make you accept it as a fact .     perhaps   said dom  with equanimity .    granted it is now thousands of years twenty thousand perhaps since the people of the galaxy have concerned themselves with earth  how is it possible that we have all forgotten our planet of origin .     twenty thousand years is a longer time than you realize .  there are many aspects of the early empire we know little of  many legends that are almost surely fictitious but that we keep repeating  and even believing  because of lack of anything to substitute .  and earth is older than the empire .     but surely there are some records .  my good friend  pelorat  collects myths and legends of early earth  anything he can scrape up from any source .  it is his profession and  more important  his hobby .  those myths and legends are all there are .  there are no actual records  no documents .     documents twenty thousand years old .  things decay  perish  are destroyed through inefficiency or war .     but there should be records of the records  copies  copies of the copies  and copies of the copies of the copies  useful material much younger than twenty millennia .  they have been removed .  the galactic library at trantor must have had documents concerning earth .  those documents are referred to in known historical records  but the documents no longer exist in the galactic library .  the references to them may exist  but any quotations from them do not exist .     remember that trantor was sacked a few centuries ago     the library was left untouched .  it was protected by the personnel of the second foundation .  and it was those personnel who recently discovered that material related to earth no longer exists .  the material was deliberately removed in recent times .  why .   trevize ceased his pacing and looked intently at dom .   if i find earth  i will find out what it is hiding     hiding .     hiding or being hidden .  once i find that out  i have the feeling i will know why i have chosen gaia and galaxia over our individuality .  then  i presume  i will know  not feel  that i am correct  and if lam correct  he lifted his shoulders hopelessly  then so be it .     if you feel that is so   said dom   and if you feel you must hunt for earth  then  of course  we will help you do as much as we can .  that help  however  is limited .  for instance  i we gaia do not know where earth may be located among the immense wilderness of worlds that make up the galaxy .     even so   said trevize   i must search .   even if the endless powdering of stars in the galaxy makes the quest seem hopeless  and even if i must do it alone .      trevize was surrounded by the tameness of gaia .  the temperature  as always  was comfortable  and the air moved pleasantly  refreshing but not chilling .  clouds drifted across the sky  interrupting the sunlight now and then  and  no doubt  if the water vapor level per meter of open land surface dropped sufficiently in this place or that  there would be enough rain to restore it .   the trees grew in regular spacings  like an orchard  and did so  no doubt  all over the world .  the land and sea were stocked with plant and animal life in proper numbers and in the proper variety to provide an appropriate ecological balance  and all of them  no doubt  increased and decreased in numbers in a slow sway about the recognized optimum .   as did the number of human beings  too .   of all the objects within the purview of trevize s vision  the only wild card in the deck was his ship  the far star .   the ship had been cleaned and refurbished efficiently and well by a number of the human components of gaia .  it had been restocked with food and drink  its furnishings had been renewed or replaced  its mechanical workings rechecked .  trevize himself had checked the ship s computer carefully .   nor did the ship need refueling  for it was one of the few gravitic ships of the foundation  running on the energy of the general gravitational field of the galaxy  and that was enough to supply all the possible fleets of humanity for all the eons of their likely existence without measurable decrease of intensity .   three months ago  trevize had been a councilman of terminus .  he had  in other words  been a member of the legislature of the foundation and  ex officio  a great one of the galaxy .  was it only three months ago .  it seemed it was half his thirty two year old lifetime since that had been his post and his only concern had been whether the great seldon plan had been valid or not  whether the smooth rise of the foundation from planetary village to galactic greatness had been properly charted in advance  or not .   yet in some ways  there was no change .  he was still a councilman .  his status and his privileges remained unchanged  except that he didn t expect he would ever return to terminus to claim that status and those privileges .  he would no more fit into the huge chaos of the foundation than into the small orderliness of gaia .  he was at home nowhere  an orphan everywhere .   his jaw tightened and he pushed his fingers angrily through his black hair .  before he wasted time bemoaning his fate  he must find earth .  if he survived the search  there would then be time enough to sit down and weep .  he might have even better reason then .   with determined stolidity  then  he thought back   three months before  he and janov pelorat  that able  naive scholar  had left terminus .  pelorat had been driven by his antiquarian enthusiasms to discover the site of long lost earth  and trevize had gone along  using pelorat s goal as a cover for what he thought his own real aim was .  they did not find earth  but they did find gaia  and trevize had then found himself forced to make his fateful decision .   now it was he  trevize  who had turned half circle about face and was searching for earth .   as for pelorat  he  too  had found something he didn t expect .  he had found the black haired  dark eyed bliss  the young woman who was gaia  even as dom was and as the nearest grain of sand or blade of grass was .  pelorat  with the peculiar ardor of late middle age  had fallen in love with a woman less than half his years  and the young woman  oddly enough  seemed content with that .   it was odd but pelorat was surely happy and trevize thought resignedly that each person must find happiness in his or her own manner .  that was the point of individuality the individuality that trevize  by his choice  was abolishing  given time  over all the galaxy .   the pain returned .  that decision he had made  and had had to make  continued to excoriate him at every moment and was    golan .    the voice intruded on trevize s thoughts and he looked up in the direction of the sun  blinking his eyes .    ah  janov   he said heartily the more heartily because he did not want pelorat guessing at the sourness of his thoughts .  he even managed a jovial   you ve managed to tear yourself away from bliss  i see .    pelorat shook his head .  the gentle breeze stirred his silky white hair  and his long solemn face retained its length and solemnity in full .   actually  old chap  it was she that suggested i see you about about what i want to discuss .  not that i wouldn t have wanted to see you on my own  of course  but she seems to think more quickly than i do .    trevize smiled .   it s all right  janov .  you re here to say good bye  i ta i  it .    well  no  not exactly .  in fact  more nearly the reverse .  golan  when w  left terminus  you and i  i was intent on finding earth .  i ve spent virtually my entire adult life at that task .     and i will carry on  janov .  the task is mine now .     yes  but it s mine  also  mine  still .     but   trevize lifted an arm in a vague all inclusive gesture of the world about them .   pelorat said  in a sudden urgent gasp   i want to go with you .    trevize felt astonished .   you can t mean that  janov .  you have gala now .     i ll come back to gaia someday  but i cannot let you go alone .     certainly you can .  i can take care of myself .     no offense  golan  but you don t know enough .  it is i who know the myths and legends .  i can direct you .     and you ll leave bliss .  come  now .    a faint pink colored pelorat s cheeks .   i don t exactly want to do that  old chap  but she said    trevize frowned .   is it that she s trying to get rid of you  janov .  she promised me     no  you don t understand .  please listen to me  golan .  you do have this uncomfortable explosive way of jumping to conclusions before you hear one out .  it s your specialty  i know  and i seem to have a certain difficulty in expressing myself concisely  but     well   said trevize gently   suppose you tell me exactly what it is that bliss has on her mind in just any way you please  and i promise to be very patient .     thank you  and as long as you re going to be patient  i think i can come out with it right away .  you see  bliss wants to come  too .     bliss wants to come .   said trevize .   no  i m exploding again .  i won t explode .  tell me  janov  why would bliss want to come along .  i m asking it quietly .     she didn t say .  she said she wants to talk to you .     then why isn t she here  eh .    pelorat said   i think i say i think that she is rather of the opinion that you are not fond of her  golan  and she rather hesitates to approach you .  i have done my best  old man  to assure her that you have nothing against her .  i cannot believe anyone would think anything but highly of her .  still  she wanted me to broach the subject with you  so to speak .  may i tell her that you ll be willing to see her  golan .     of course  i ll see her right now .     and you ll be reasonable .  you see  old man  she s rather intense about it .  she said the matter was vital and she must go with you .     she didn t tell you why  did she .     no  but if she thinks she must go  so must gaia .      which means i mustn t refuse .  is that right  janov .     yes  i think you mustn t  golan .    for the first time during his brief stay on gaia  trevize entered bliss s house which now sheltered pelorat as well .   trevize looked about briefly .  on gaia  houses tended to be simple .  with the all but complete absence of violent weather of any kind  with the temperature mild at all times in this particular latitude  with even the tectonic plates slipping smoothly when they had to slip  there was no point in building houses designed for elaborate protection  or for maintaining a comfortable environment within an uncomfortable one .  the whole planet was a house  so to speak  designed to shelter its inhabitants .   bliss s house within that planetary house was small  the windows screened ether than glassed  the furniture sparse and gracefully utilitarian .  there were holographic images on the walls  one of them of pelorat looking rather astonished and self conscious .  trevize s lips twitched but he tried not to let his amusement show  and he fell to adjusting his waist sash meticulously .   bliss watched him .  she wasn t smiling in her usual fashion .  rather  she looked serious  her fine dark eyes wide  her hair tumbling to her shoulders in a gentle black wave .  only her full lips  touched with red  lent a bit of color to her face .    thank you for coming to see me  trev .     janov was very urgent in his request  blissenobiarella .    bliss smiled briefly .   well returned .  if you will call me bliss  a decent monosyllable  i will try to say your name in full  trevize .   she stumbled  almost unnoticeably  over the second syllable .   trevize held up his right hand .   that would be a good arrangement .  i recognize the gaian habit of using one syllable name portions in the common interchange of thoughts  so if you should happen to call me trev now and then i will not be offended .  still  i will be more comfortable if you try to say trevize as often as you can and i shall say bliss .    trevize studied her  as he always did when he encountered her .  as an individual  she was a young woman in her early twenties .  as part of gait  however  she was thousands of years old .  it made no difference in her appearance  but it made a difference in the way she spoke sometimes  and in the atmosphere that inevitably surrounded her .  did he want it this way for everyone who existed .  no .  surely  no  and yet   bliss said   i will get to the point .  you stressed your desire to find earth     i spoke to dom   said trevize  determined not to give in to gaia without a perpetual insistence on his own point of view .    yes  but in speaking to dom  you spoke to gaia and to every part of it  so that you spoke to me  for instance .     did you hear me as i spoke .     no  for i wasn t listening  but if  thereafter  i paid attention  i could remember what you said .  please accept that and let us go on .   you stressed your desire to find earth and insisted on its importance .  i do not see that importance but you have the knack of being right so i we gaia must accept what you say .  if the mission is crucial to your decision concerning gaia  it is of crucial importance to gaia  and so gaia must go with you  if only to try to protect you .     when you say gaia must go with me  you mean you must go with me .  am i correct .     i am gaia   said bliss simply .    but so is everything else on and in this planet .  why  then  you .  why not some other portion of gaia .     because pel wishes to go with you  and if he goes with you  he would not be happy with any other portion of gaia than myself .    pelorat  who sat rather unobtrusively on a chair in another corner  with his back  trevize noted  to his own image  said softly   that s true  golan .  bliss is my portion of gaia .    bliss smiled suddenly .   it seems rather exciting to be thought of in that way .  it s very alien  of course .     well  let s see .   trevize put his hands behind his head and began to lean backward in his chair .  the thin legs creaked as he did so  so that he quickly decided the chair was not sturdy enough to endure that game and brought it down to all four feet .   will you still be part of gaia if you leave her .     i need not be .  i can isolate myself  for instance  if i seem in danger of serious harm  so that harm will not necessarily spill over into gaia  or if there is any other overriding reason for it .  that  however  is a matter of emergency only .  generally  i will remain part of gaia .     even if we jump through hyperspace .     even then  though that will complicate matters somewhat .     somehow i don t find that comforting .     why not .    trevize wrinkled his nose in the usual metaphoric response to a bad smell .   it means that anything that is said and done on my ship that you hear and see will be heard and seen by all of gaia .     i am gaia so what i see  hear  and sense  gaia will see  hear  and sense .     exactly .  even that wall will see  hear  and sense .    bliss looked at the wall he pointed to and shrugged .   yes  that wall  too .  it has only an infinitesimal consciousness so that it senses and understands only infinitesimally  but i presume there are some subatomic shifts in response to what we are saying right now  for instance  that enable it to fit into gaia with more purposeful intent for the good of the whole .     but what if i wish privacy .  i may not want the wall to be aware of what i say or do .    bliss looked exasperated and pelorat broke in suddenly .   you know  golan  i don t want to interfere  since i obviously don t know much about gaia .  still  i ve been with bliss and i ve gathered somehow some of what it s all about .   if you walk through a crowd on terminus  you see and hear a great many things  and you may remember some of it .  you might even be able to recall all of it under the proper cerebral stimulation  but mostly you don t care .  you let it go .  even if you watch some emotional scene between strangers and even if you re interested  still  if it s of no great concern to you you let it go you forget .  it must be so on gaia  too .  even if all of gaia knows your business intimately  that doesn t mean that gaia necessarily cares .   isn t that so  bliss dear .     i ve never thought of it that way  pel  but there is something in what you say .  still  this privacy trev talks about i mean  trevize is nothing we value at all .  in fact  i we gaia find it incomprehensible .  to want to be not part to have your voice unheard your deeds unwitnessed your thoughts unsensed   bliss shook her head vigorously .   i said that we can block ourselves off in emergencies  but who would want to live that way  even for an hour .     i would   said trevize .   that is why i must find earth to find out the overriding reason  if any  that drove me to choose this dreadful fate for humanity .     it is not a dreadful fate  but let us not debate the matter .  i will be with you  not as a spy  but as a friend and helper .  gaia will be with you not as a spy  but as a friend and helper .    trevize said  somberly   gaia could help me best by directing me to earth .    slowly  bliss shook her head .   gaia doesn t know the location of earth .  dom has already told you that .     i don t quite believe that .  after all  you must have records .  why have i never been able to see those records during my stay here .  even if gaia honestly doesn t know where earth might be located  i might gain some knowledge from the records .  i know the galaxy in considerable detail  undoubtedly much better than gaia does .  i might be able to understand and follow hints in your records that gaia  perhaps  doesn t quite catch .     but what records are these you talk of  trevize .     any records .  books  films  recordings  holographs  artifacts  whatever it is you have .  in the time i ve been here i haven t seen one item that i would consider in any way a record .   have you  janov .     no   said pelorat hesitantly   but i haven t really looked .     yet i have  in my quiet way   said trevize   and i ve seen nothing .  nothing .  i can only suppose they re being hidden from me .  why  i wonder .  would you tell me that .    bliss s smooth young forehead wrinkled into a puzzled frown .   why didn t you ask before this .  i we gaia hide nothing  and we tell no lies .  an isolate   an individual in isolation might tell lies .  he is limited  and is fearful because he is limited .  gaia  however  is a planetary organism of great mental ability and has no fear .  for gaia to tell lies  to create descriptions that are at variance with reality  is totally unnecessary .    trevize snorted .   then why have i carefully been kept from seeing any records .  give me a reason that makes sense .     of course .   she held out both hands  palms up before her .   we don t have any records .       pelorat recovered first  seeming the less astonished of the two .    my dear   he said gently   that is quite impossible .  you cannot have a reasonable civilization without records of some kind .    bliss raised her eyebrows .   i understand that .  i merely mean we have no records of the type that trev trevize is talking about  or was at all likely to come across .  i we gala have no writings  no printings  no films  no computer data banks  nothing .  we have no carvings on stone  for that matter .  that s all i m saying .  naturally  since we have none of these  trevize found none of these .    trevize said   what do you have  then  if you don t have any records that i would recognize as records .    bliss said  enunciating carefully  as though she were speaking to a child .   i we gala have a memory .  i remember .     what do you remember .   asked trevize .    everything .     you remember all reference data .     certainly .     for how long .  for how many years back .     for indefinite lengths of time .     you could give me historical data  biographical  geographical  scientific .  even local gossip .     everything .     all in that little head .   trevize pointed sardonically at bliss s right temple .    no   she said .   gala s memories are not limited to the contents of my particular skull .  see here  for the moment she grew formal and even a little stern  as she ceased being bliss solely and took on an amalgam of other units    there must have been a time before the beginning of history when human beings were so primitive that  although they could remember events  they could not speak .  speech was invented and served to express memories and to transfer them from person to person .  writing was eventually invented in order to record memories and transfer them across time from generation to generation .  all technological advance since then has served to make more room for the transfer and storage of memories and to make the recall of desired items easier .  however  once individuals joined to form gaia  all that became obsolete .  we can return to memory  the basic system of record keeping on which all else is built .  do you see that .    trevize said   are you saying that the sum total of all brains on gaia can remember far more data than a single brain can .     of course .     but if gaia has all the records spread through the planetary memory  what good is that to you as an individual portion of gaia .     all the good you can wish .  whatever i might want to know is in an individual mind somewhere  maybe in many of them .  if it is very fundamental  such as the meaning of the word  chair   it is in every mind .  but even if it is something esoteric that is in only one small portion of gala s mind  i eau   call it up if i need it  though such recall may take a bit longer than if the a memory is more widespread .   look  trevize  if you want to know some .  thing that isn t in your mind  you look at some appropriate book film    r make use of a computer s data banks .  i scan gala s total mind .    trevize said   how do you keep all that information from pouring into your mind and bursting your cranium .     are you indulging in sarcasm  trevize .    pelorat said   come  golan  don t be unpleasant .      trevize looked from one to the other and  with a visible effort  allowed tightness about his face to relax .   i m sorry .  i m borne down by a responsibility i don t want and don t know how to get rid of .  that may make me sound unpleasant when i don t intend to be .  bliss  i really wish to know .  how do you draw upon the contents of the brains of others without then storing it in your own brain and quickly overloading its capacity .    bliss said   i don t know  trevize  any more than you know the detailed workings of your single brain .  i presume you know the distance from your sun to a neighboring star  but you are not always conscious of it .  you store it somewhere and can retrieve the figure at any time if asked .  if not asked  you   may with time forget it  but you can then always retrieve it from some data bank .  if you consider gala s brain a vast data bank  it is one i can call on  but there is no need for me to remember consciously any particular item i have made use of .  once i have made use of a fact or memory  i can allow it to pass out of memory .  for that matter  i can deliberately put it back  so to speak  in the place i got it from .     how many people on gaia  bliss .  how many human beings .     about a billion .  do you want the exact figure as of now .    trevize smiled ruefully .   i quite see you can call up the exact figure if you wish  but i ll take the approximation .     actually   said bliss   the population is stable and oscillates about a particular number that is slightly in excess of a billion .  i can tell by how much the number exceeds or falls short of the mean by extending my consciousness and well feeling the boundaries .  i can t explain it better than that to some one who has never shared the experience .     it seems to me  however  that a billion human minds a number of them being those of children are surely not enough to hold in memory all the data needed by a complex society .     but human beings are not the only living things on gaia  trev .     do you mean that animals remember  too .     nonhuman brains can t store memories with the same density human brains can  and much of the room in all brains  human and nonhuman alike  must be given over to personal memories which are scarcely useful except to the particular component of the planetary consciousness that harbors them .  however  significant quantities of advanced data can be  and are  stored in animal brains  also in plant tissue  and in the mineral structure of the planet .     in the mineral structure .  the rocks and mountain range  you mean .     and  for some kinds of data  the ocean and atmosphere .  all that is gaia  too .     but what can nonliving systems hold .     a great deal .  the intensity is low but the volume is so great that a large majority of gaia s total memory is in its rocks .  it takes a little longer to retrieve and replace rock memories so that it is the preferred place for storing dead data  so to speak items that  in the normal course of events  would rarely be called upon .     what happens when someone dies whose brain stores data of considerable value .     the data is not lost .  it is slowly crowded out as the brain disorganizes after death  but there is ample time to distribute the memories into other parts of gaia .  and as new brains  appear in babies and become more organized with growth  they not only develop their personal memories and thoughts but are fed appropriate knowledge from other sources .  what you would call education is entirely automatic with me us gaia .    pelorat said   frankly  golan  it seems to me that this notion of a living world has a great deal to be said for it .    trevize gave his fellow foundationer a brief  sidelong glance .   i m sure of that  janov  but i m not impressed .  the planet  however big and however diverse  represents one brain .  one .  every new brain that arises is melted into the whole .  where s the opportunity for opposition  for disagreement .  when you think of human history  you think of the occasional human being whose minority view may be condemned by society but who wins out in the end and changes the world .  what chance is there on gaia for the great rebels of history .     there is internal conflict   said bliss .   not every aspect of gaia necessarily accepts the common view .     it must be limited   said trevize .   you cannot have too much turmoil within a single organism  or it would not work properly .  if progress and development are not stopped altogether  they must certainly be slowed .  can we take the chance of inflicting that on the entire galaxy .  on all of humanity .    bliss said  without open emotion   are you now questioning your own decision .  are you changing your mind and are you now saying that gaia is an undesirable future for humanity .    trevize tightened his lips and hesitated .  then  he said  slowly   i would like to  but not yet .  i made my decision on some basis  some unconscious basis and until i find out what that basis was  i cannot truly decide whether i am to maintain or change my decision .  let us therefore return to the matter of earth .     where you feel you will learn the nature of the basis on which you made your decision .  is that it  trevize .     that is the feeling i have .   now dom says gaia does not know the location of earth .  and you agree with him  i believe .     of course i agree with him .  i am no less gaia than he is .     and do you withhold knowledge from me .  consciously  i mean .     of course not .  even if it were possible for gaia to lie  it would not lie to you .  above all  we depend upon your conclusions  and we need them to be accurate  and that requires that they be based on reality .     in that case   said trevize   let s make use of your world memory .  probe backward and tell me how far you can remember .    there was a small hesitation .  bliss looked blankly at trevize  as though  for a moment  she was in a trance .  then she said   fifteen thousand years .     why did you hesitate .     it took time .  old memories really old are almost all in the mountain roots where it takes time to dig them out .     fifteen thousand years ago  then .  is that when gaia was settled .     no  to the best of our knowledge that took place some three thousand years before that .     why are you uncertain .  don t you or gaia remember .    bliss said   that was before gaia had developed to the point where memory became a global phenomenon .     yet before you could rely on your collective memory  gaia must have kept records  bliss .  records in the usual sense recorded  written  filmed  and so on .     i imagine so  but they could scarcely endure all this time .     they could have been copied or  better yet  transferred into the global memory  once that was developed .    bliss frowned .  there was another hesitation  longer this time .   i find no sign of these earlier records you speak of .     why is that .     i don t know  trevize .  i presume that they proved of no great importance .    imagine that by the time it was understood that the early nonmemory records were decaying  it was decided that they had grown archaic and wore not needed .     you don t know that .  you presume and you imagine  but you don t know that .  gaia doesn t know that .    bliss s eyes fell .   it must be so .     must be .  i am not a part of gaia and therefore i need not presume what gaia presumes which gives you an example of the importance of isolation .  i  as an isolate  presume something else .     what do you presume .     first  there is something i am sure of .  a civilization in being is not likely to destroy its early records .  far from judging them to be archaic and unnecessary  they are likely to treat them with exaggerated reverence and would labor to preserve them .  if gaia s preglobal records were destroyed  bliss  that destruction is not likely to have been voluntary .     how would you explain it  then .     in the library at trantor  all references to earth were removed by someone or some force other than that of the trantorian second foundationers themselves .  isn t it possible  then  that on gaia  too  all references to earth were removed by something other than gaia itself .     how do you know the early records involved earth .     according to you  gaia was founded at least eighteen thousand years ago .  that brings us back to the period before the establishment of the galactic empire  to the period when the galaxy was being settled and the prime source of settlers was earth .  pelorat will confirm that .    pelorat  caught a little by surprise by suddenly being called on  cleared his throat .   so go the legends  my dear .  i take those legends seriously and i think  as golan trevize does  that the human species was originally confined to a single planet and that planet was earth .  the earliest settlers came from earth .     if  then   said trevize   gaia was founded in the early days of hyperspatial travel  then it is very likely to have been colonized by earthmen  or possibly by natives of a not very old world that had not long before been colonized by earthmen .  for that reason  the records of gaia s settlement and of the first few millennia thereafter must clearly have involved earth and earthmen and those records are gone .  something seems to be seeing to it that earth is not mentioned anywhere in the records of the galaxy .  and if so  there must be some reason for it .    bliss said indignantly   this is conjecture  trevize .  you have no evidence for this .     but it is gaia that insists that my special talent is that of coming to correct conclusions on the basis of insufficient evidence .  if  then  i come to a firm conclusion  don t tell me i lack evidence .    bliss was silent .   trevize went on   all the more reason then for finding earth .  i intend to leave as soon as the far star is ready .  do you two still want to come .     yes   said bliss at once  and  yes   said pelorat .     chapter    toward comporellon    .   it was raining lightly .  trevize looked up at the sky  which was a solid grayish white .   he was wearing a rain hat that repelled the drops and sent them flying well away from his body in all directions .  pelorat  standing out of range of the flying drops  had no such protection .   trevize said   i don t see the point of your letting yourself get wet  janov .     the wet doesn t bother me  my dear chap   said pelorat  looking as solemn as he always did .   it s a light and warm rain .  there s no wind to speak of .  and besides  to quote the old saying   in anacreon  do as the anacreonians do .    he indicated the few gaians standing near the far star  watching quietly .  they were well scattered  as though they were trees in a gaian grove  and none wore rain hats .    i suppose   said trevize   they don t mind being wet  because all the rest of gaia is getting wet .  the trees the grass the soil all wet  and all equally part of gaia  along with the gaians .     i think it makes sense   said pelorat .   the sun will come out soon enough and everything will dry quickly .  the clothing won t wrinkle or shrink  there s no chilling effect  and  since there aren t any unnecessary pathogenic microorganisms  no one will get colds  or flu  or pneumonia .  why worry about a bit of damp then .    trevize had no trouble in seeing the logic of that  but he hated to let go of his grievance .  he said   still  there is no need for it to rain as we are leaving .  after all  the rain is voluntary .  gaia wouldn t rain if it didn t want to .  it s almost as though it were showing its contempt for us .     perhaps  and pelorat s lip twitched a bit  gaia is weeping with sorrow at our leaving .    trevize said   that may be  but i m not .     actually   pelorat went on   i presume that the soil in this region needs a wetting down  and that need is more important than your desire to have the sun shine .    trevize smiled .   i suspect you really like this world  don t you .  even aside from bliss  i mean .     yes  i do   said pelorat  a trace defensively .   i ve always led a quiet  orderly life  and think how i could manage here  with a whole world laboring to keep it quiet and orderly .   after all  golan  when we build a house or that ship we try to create a perfect shelter .  we equip it with everything we need  we arrange to have its temperature  air quality  illumination  and everything else of importance  controlled by us and manipulated in a way to make it perfectly accommodating to us .  gaia is just an extension of the desire for comfort and security extended to an entire planet .  what s wrong with that .     what s wrong with that   said trevize   is that my house or my ship is engineered to suit me .  i am not engineered to suit it .  if i were part of gaia  then no matter how ideally the planet was devised to suit me  i would be greatly disturbed over the fact that i was also being devised to suit it .    pelorat pursed his lips .   one could argue that every society molds its population to fit itself .  customs develop that make sense within the society  and that chain every individual firmly to its needs .     in the societies i know  one can revolt .  there are eccentrics  even criminals .     do you want eccentrics and criminals .     why not .  you and i are eccentrics .  we re certainly not typical of the people living on terminus .  as for criminals  that s a matter of definition .  and if criminals are the price we must pay for rebels  heretics  and geniuses  i m willing to pay it .  i demand the price be paid .     are criminals the only possible payment .  can t you have genius without criminals .     you can t have geniuses and saints without having people far outside the norm  and i don t see how you can have such things on only one side of the norm .  there is bound to be a certain symmetry .   in any case  i want a better reason for my decision to make gaia the model for the future of humanity than that it is a planetary version of a comfortable house .     oh  my dear fellow .  i wasn t trying to argue you into being satisfied with your decision .  i was just making an observa    he broke off .  bliss was striding toward them  her dark hair wet and her robe clinging to her body and emphasizing the rather generous width of her hips .  she was nodding to them as she came .    i m sorry i delayed you   she said  panting a little .   it took longer to check with dom than i had anticipated .     surely   said trevize   you know everything he knows .     sometimes it s a matter of a difference in interpretation .  we are not identical  after all  so we discuss .  look here   she said  with a touch of asperity   you have two hands .  they are each part of you  and they seem identical except for one being the mirror image of the other .  yet you do not use them entirely alike  do you .  there are some things you do with your right hand most of the time  and some with your left .  differences in interpretation  so to speak .     she s got you   said pelorat  with obvious satisfaction .   trevize nodded .   it s an effective analogy  if it were relevant  and i m not at all sure it is .  in any case  does this mean we can board the ship now .  it is raining .     yes  yes .  our people are all off it  and it s in perfect shape .   then  with a sudden curious look at trevize   you re keeping dry .  the raindrops are missing you .     yes  indeed   said trevize .   i am avoiding wetness .     but doesn t it feel good to be wet now and then .     absolutely .  but at my choice  not the rain s .    bliss shrugged .   well  as you please .  all our baggage is loaded so let s board .    the three walked toward the far star .  the rain was growing still lighter  but the grass was quite wet .  trevize found himself walking gingerly  but bliss had kicked off her slippers  which she was now carrying in one hand  and was slogging through the grass barefoot .    it feels delightful   she said  in response to trevize s downward glance .    good   he said absently .  then  with a touch of irritation   why are those other gaians standing about  anyway .    bliss said   they re recording this event  which gaia finds momentous .  you are important to us  trevize .  consider that if you should change your mind as a result of this trip and decide against us  we would never grow into galaxia  or even remain as gaia .     then i represent life and death for gaia  for the whole world .     we believe so .    trevize stopped suddenly  and took off his rain hat .  blue patches were appearing in the sky .  he said   but you have my vote in your favor now .  if you kill me  i ll never be able to change it .     golan   murmured pelorat  shocked .   that is a terrible thing to say .     typical of an isolate   said bliss calmly .   you must understand  trevize  that we are not interested in you as a person  or even in your vote  but in the truth  in the facts of the matter .  you are only important as a conduit to the truth  and your vote as an indication of the truth .  that is what we want from you  and if we kill you to avoid a change in your vote  we would merely be hiding the truth from ourselves .     if i tell you the truth is non gaia  will you all then cheerfully agree to die .     not entirely cheerfully  perhaps  but it s what it would amount to in the end .    trevize shook his head .   if anything ought to convince me that gaia is a horror and should die  it might be that very statement you ve just made .   then he said  his eyes returning to the patiently watching  and  presumably  listening  gaians   why are they spread out like that .  and why do you need so many .  if one of them observes this event and stores it in his or her memory  isn t it available to all the rest of the planet .  can t it be stored in a million different places if you want it to be .    bliss said   they are observing this each from a different angle  and each is storing it in a slightly different brain .  when all the observations are studied  it will be seen that what is taking place will be far better understood from all the observations together than from any one of them  taken singly .     the whole is greater than the sum of the parts  in other words .     exactly .  you have grasped the basic justification of gaia s existence .  you  as a human individual  are composed of perhaps fifty trillion cells  but you  as a multicellular individual  are far more important than those fifty trillion as the sum of their individual importance .  surely you would agree with that .     yes   said trevize .   i agree with that .    he stepped into the ship  and turned briefly for one more look at gaia .  the brief rain had lent a new freshness to the atmosphere .  he saw a green  lush  quiet  peaceful world  a garden of serenity set amid the turbulence of the weary galaxy .    and trevize earnestly hoped he would never see it again .     .   when the airlock closed behind them  trevize felt as though he had shut out not exactly a nightmare  but something so seriously abnormal that it had prevented him from breathing freely .   he was fully aware that an element of that abnormality was still with him in the person of bliss .  while she was there  gaia was there and yet he was also convinced that her presence was essential .  it was the black box working again  and earnestly he hoped he would never begin believing in that black box too much .   he looked about the vessel and found it beautiful .  it had been his only since mayor harla branno of the foundation had forced him into it and sent him out among the stars a living lightning rod designed to draw the fire of those she considered enemies of the foundation .  that task was done but the  ship was still his  and he had no plans to return it .   it had been his for merely a matter of a few months  but it seemed like home to him and he could only dimly remember what had once been his home in terminus .   terminus .  the off center hub of the foundation  destined  by seldon s plan  to form a second and greater empire in the course of the next five centuries  except that he  trevize  had now derailed it .  by his own decision he was converting the foundation to nothing  and was making possible instead  a new society  a new scheme of life  a frightening revolution that would be greater than any since the development of multicellular life .   now he was engaged in a journey designed to prove to himself  or to disprove  that what he had done was right .   he found himself lost in thought and motionless  so that he shook himself in self irritation .  he hastened to the pilot room and found his computer still there .   it glistened  everything glistened .  there had been a most careful cleaning .  the contacts he closed  nearly at random  worked perfectly  and  it surely seemed  with greater ease than ever .  the ventilating system was so noiseless that he had to put his hand over the vents to make sure he felt air currents .   the circle of light on the computer glowed invitingly .  trevize touched it and the light spread out to cover the desk top and the outline of a right and left hand appeared on it .  he drew a deep breath and realized that he had stopped breathing for a while .  the gaians knew nothing about foundation technology and they might easily have damaged the computer without meaning any malice .  thus far they had not the hands were still there .   the crucial test came with the laying on of his own hands  however  and  for a moment  he hesitated .  he would know  almost at once  if anything were wrong but if something was  what could he do .  for repairs  he would have to go back to terminus  and if he did  he felt quite confident that mayor branno would not let him leave again .  and if he did not   he could feel his heart pounding  and there was clearly no point in deliberately lengthening the suspense .   he thrust his hands out  right  left  and placed them on the outlines upon the desk .  at once  he had the illusion of another pair of hands holding his .  his senses extended  and he could see gaia in all directions  green and moist  the gaians still watching .  when he willed himself to look upward  he saw a largely cloudy sky .  again  at his will  the clouds vanished and he looked at an unbroken blue sky with the orb of gaia s sun filtered out .   again he willed and the blue parted and he saw the stars .   he wiped them out  and willed and saw the galaxy  like a foreshortened pinwheel .  he tested the computerized image  adjusting its orientation  altering the apparent progress of time  making it spin first in one direction  then the other .  he located the sun of sayshell  the nearest important star to gaia  then the sun of terminus  then of trantor  one after the other .  he traveled from star to star in the galactic map that dwelt in the bowels of the computer .   then he withdrew his hands and let the world of reality surround him again and realized he had been standing all this time  half bowing over the computer to make the hand contact .  he felt stiff and had to stretch his back muscles before sitting down .   he stared at the computer with warm relief .  it had worked perfectly .  it had been  if anything  more responsive  and what he felt for it he could only describe as love .  after all  while he held its hands  he resolutely refused to admit to himself that he thought of it as her hands  they were part of each other  and his will directed  controlled  experienced  and was part of a greater self .  he and it must feel  in a small way  he suddenly  and disturbingly  thought   what gaia did in a much larger way .   he shook his head .  no .  in the case of the computer and himself  it was he  trevize who was in entire control .  the computer was a thing of total submission .   he rose and moved out to the compact galley and dining area .  there was plenty of food of all kinds  with proper refrigeration and easy heating facilities .  he had already noted that the book films in his room were in the proper order  and he was reasonably sure no  completely sure that pelorat had his personal library in safe storage .  he would otherwise surely have heard from him by now .   pelorat .  that reminded him .  he stepped into pelorat s room .   is there room for bliss here  janov .     oh yes  quite .     i can convert the common room into her bedroom .    bliss looked up  wide eyed .   i have no desire for a separate bedroom .  i am quite content to stay here with pel .  i suppose  though  that i may use the other rooms when needed .  the gym  for instance .     certainly .  any room but mine .     good .  that s what i would have suggested be the arrangement  if i had had the making of it .  naturally  you will stay out of ours .     naturally   said trevize  looking down and realizing that his shoes overlapped the threshold .  he took a half step backward and said grimly   these are not honeymoon quarters  bliss .     i should say  in view of its compactness  that it is exactly that even though gaia extended it to half again as wide as it was .    trevize tried not to smile .   you ll have to be very friendly .     we are   said pelorat  clearly ill at ease at the topic of conversation   but really  old chap  you can leave it to us to make our own arrangements .     actually  i can t   said trevize slowly .   i still want to make it clear that these are not honeymoon accommodations .  i have no objection to anything you do by mutual consent  but you must realize that you will have no privacy .  i hope you understand that  bliss .     there is a door   said bliss   and i imagine you will not disturb us who it is locked short of a real emergency  that is .     of course i won t .  however  there is no soundproofing .     what you are trying to say  trevize   said bliss   is that you will hear  quite clearly  any conversation we may have  and any sounds we may make in the course of sex .     yes  that is what i am trying to say .  with that in mind  i expect you may find you will have to limit your activities here .  this may discommode you  and i m sorry  but that s the situation as it is .    pelorat cleared his throat  and said gently   actually  golan  this is a problem i ve already had to face .  you realize that any sensation bliss experiences  when together with me  is experienced by all of gaia .     i have thought of that  janov   said trevize  looking as though he were repressing a wince .   i didn t intend to mention it just in case the thought had not occurred to you .     but it did  i m afraid   said pelorat .   bliss said   don t make too much of that  trevize .  at any given moment  there may be thousands of human beings on gaia who are engaged in sex  millions who are eating  drinking  or engaged in other pleasure giving activities .  this gives rise to a general aura of delight that gaia feels  every part of it .  the lower animals  the plants  the minerals have their progressively milder pleasures that also contribute to a generalized joy of consciousness that gaia feels in all its parts always  and that is unfelt in any other world .     we have our own particular joys   said trevize   which we can share after a fashion  if we wish  or keep private  if we wish .     if you could feel ours  you would know how poverty stricken you isolates are in that respect .     how can you know what we feel .     without knowing how you feel  it is still reasonable to suppose that a world of common pleasures must be more intense than those available to a single isolated individual .     perhaps  but even if my pleasures were poverty stricken  i would keep my own joys and sorrows and be satisfied with them  thin as they are  and be me and not blood brother to the nearest rock .     don t sneer   said bliss .   you value every mineral crystal in your bones and teeth and would not have one of them damaged  though they have no more consciousness than the average rock crystal of the same size .     that s true enough   said trevize reluctantly   but we ve managed to get off the subject .  i don t care if all gaia shares your joy  bliss  but i don t want to share it .  we re living here in close quarters and i do not wish to be forced to participate in your activities even indirectly .    pelorat said   this is an argument over nothing  my dear chap .  i am no more anxious than you to have your privacy violated .  nor mine  for that matter .  bliss and i will be discreet  won t we  bliss .     it will be as you wish  pel .     after all   said pelorat   we are quite likely to be planet bound for considerably longer periods than we will space borne  and on planets  the opportunities for true privacy     i don t care what you do on planets   interrupted trevize   but on this ship  i am master .     exactly   said pelorat .    then  with that straightened out  it is time to take off .     but wait .   pelorat reached out to tug at trevize s sleeve .   take off for where .  you don t know where earth is  nor do i  nor does bliss .  nor does your computer  for you told me long ago that it lacks any information on earth .  what do you intend doing  then .  you can t simply drift through space at random  my dear chap .    at that  trevize smiled with what was almost joy .  for the first time since he had fallen into the grip of gaia  he felt master of his own fate .    i assure you   he said   that it is not my intention to drift  janov .  i know exactly where i am going .      .   pelorat walked quietly into the pilot room after he had waited long moments while his small tap on the door had gone unanswered .  he found trevize looking with keen absorption at the starfield .   pelorat said   golan   and waited .   trevize looked up .   janov .  sit down .   where s bliss .     sleeping .   we re out in space  i see .     you see correctly .   trevize was not surprised at the other s mild surprise .  in the new gravitic ships  there was simply no way of detecting takeoff .  there were no inertial effects  no accelerational push  no noise  no vibration .   possessing the capacity to insulate itself from outside gravitational fields to any degree up to total  the far star lifted from a planetary surface as though it were floating on some cosmic sea .  and while it did so  the gravitational effect within the ship  paradoxically  remained normal .   while the ship was within the atmosphere  of course  there was no need to accelerate so that the whine and vibration of rapidly passing air would be absent .  as the atmosphere was left behind  however  acceleration could take place  and at rapid rates  without affecting the passengers .   it was the ultimate in comfort and trevize did not see how it could be improved upon until such time as human beings discovered a way of whisking through hyperspace without ships  and without concern about nearby gravitational fields that might be too intense .  right now  the far star would have to speed away from gala s sun for several days before the gravitational intensity was weak enough to attempt the jump .    golan  my dear fellow   said pelorat .   may i speak with you for a moment or two .  you are not too busy .     not at all busy .  the computer handles everything once i instruct it properly .  and sometimes it seems to guess what my instructions will be  and satisfies them almost before i can articulate them .   trevize brushed the top of the desk lovingly .   pelorat said   we ve grown very friendly  golan  in the short time we ve known each other  although i must admit that it scarcely seems a short time to me .  so much has happened .  it s really peculiar when i stop to think of my moderately long life  that half of all the events i have experienced were squeezed into the last few months .  or so it would seem .  i could almost suppose    trevize held up a hand  janov  you re spinning outward from your original point  i m sure .  you began by saying we ve grown very friendly in a very short time .  yes  we have  and we still are .  for that matter  you ve known bliss an even shorter time and have grown even friendlier .     that s different  of course   said pelorat  clearing his throat in some embarrassment .    of course   said trevize   but what follows from our brief but enduring friendship .     if  my dear fellow  we still are friends  as you ve just said  then i must pass on to bliss  whom  as you ve also just said  is peculiarly dear to me .     i understand .  and what of that .     i know  golan  that you are not fond of bliss  but for my sake  i wish    trevize raised a hand .   one moment  janov .  i am not overwhelmed by bliss  but neither is she an object of hatred to me .  actually  i have no animosity toward her at all .  she s an attractive young woman and  even if she weren t  then  for your sake  i would be prepared to find her so .  it s gaia i dislike .     but bliss is gaia .     i know  janov .  that s what complicates things so .  as long as i think of bliss as a person  there s no problem .  if i think of her as gaia  there is .     but you haven t given gaia a chance  golan .   look  old chap  let me admit something .  when bliss and i are intimate  she sometimes lets me share her mind for a minute or so .  not for more than that because she says i m too old to adapt to it .   oh  don t grin  golan  you would be too old for it  too .  if an isolate  such as you or i  were to remain part of gaia for more  than a minute or two  there might be brain damage and if it s as much as five or ten minutes  it would be irreversible .   if you could only experience it  golan .     what .  irreversible brain damage .  no  thanks .     golan  you re deliberately misunderstanding me .  i mean  just that small moment of union .  you don t know what you re missing .  it s indescribable .  bliss rays there s a sense of joy .  that s like saying there s a sense of joy when you finally drink a bit of water after you have all but died of thirst .  i couldn t even begin to tell you what it s like .  you share all the pleasures that a billion people separately experience .  it isn t a steady joy  if it were you would quickly stop feeling it .  it vibrates twinkles has a strange pulsing rhythm that doesn t let you go .  it s more joy no  not more it s a better joy than you could ever experience separately .  i could weep when she shuts the door on me    trevize shook his head .   you are amazingly eloquent  my good friend  but you sound very much as though you re describing pseudendorphin addiction  or that of some other drug that admits you to joy in the short term at the price of leaving you permanently in horror in the long term .  not for me .  i am reluctant to sell my individuality for some brief feeling of joy .     i still have my individuality  golan .     but for how long will you have it if you keep it up  janov .  you ll beg for more and more of your drug until  eventually  your brain will be damaged .  janov  you mustn t let bliss do this to you .   perhaps i had better speak to her about it .     no .  don t .  you re not the soul of tact  you know  and i don t want her hurt .  i assure you she takes better care of me in that respect than you can imagine .  she s more concerned with the possibility of brain damage than i am .  you can be sure of that .     well  then  i ll speak to you .  janov  don t do this anymore .  you ve lived for fifty two years with your own kind of pleasure and joy  and your brain is adapted to withstanding that .  don t be snapped up by a new and unusual vice .  there is a price for it  if not immediately  then eventually .     yes  golan   said pelorat in a low voice  looking down at the tips of his shoes .  then he said   suppose you look at it this way .  what if you were a one celled creature     i know what you re going to say  janov .  forget it .  bliss and i have already referred to that analogy .     yes  but think a moment .  suppose we imagine single celled organisms with a human level of consciousness and with the power of thought and imagine them faced with the possibility of becoming a multicellular organism .  would not the single celled organisms mourn their loss of individuality  and bitterly resent their forthcoming enforced regimentation into the personality of an overall organism .  and would they not be wrong .  could an individual cell even imagine the power of the human brain .    trevize shook his head violently .   no  janov  it s a false analogy .  singlecelled organisms don t have consciousness or any power of thought or if they do it is so infinitesimal it might as well be considered zero .  for such objects to combine and lose individuality is to lose something they have never really had .  a human being  however  is conscious and does have the power of thought .  he has an actual consciousness and an actual independent intelligence to lose  so the analogy fails .    there was silence between the two of them for a moment  an almost oppressive silence  and finally pelorat  attempting to wrench the conversation in a new direction  said   why do you stare at the viewscreen .     habit   said trevize  smiling wryly .   the computer tells me that there are no gaian ships following me and that there are no sayshellian fleets coming to meet me .  still i look anxiously  comforted by my own failure to see such ships  when the computer s sensors are hundreds of times keener and more piercing than my eyes .  what s more  the computer is capable of sensing some properties of space very delicately  properties that my senses can t perceive under any conditions .   knowing all that  i still stare .    pelorat said   golan  if we are indeed friends     i promise you i will do nothing to grieve bliss  at least  nothing i can help .     it s another matter now .  you keep your destination from me  as though you don t trust me with it .  where are we going .  are you of the opinion you know where earth is .    trevize looked up  eyebrows lifted .   i m sorry .  i have been hugging the secret to my own bosom  haven t i .     yes  but why .    trevize said   why  indeed .  i wonder  my friend  if it isn t a matter of bliss .     bliss .  is it that you don t want her to know .  really  old fellow  she is completely to be trusted .     it s not that .  what s the use of not trusting her .  i suspect she can tweak any secret out of my mind if she wishes to .  i think i have a more childish reason than that .  i have the feeling that you are paying attention only to her and that i no longer really exist .    pelorat looked horrified .   but that s not true  golan .     i know  but i m trying to analyze my own feelings .  you came to me just now with fears for our friendship  and thinking about it  i feel as though i ve had the same fears .  i haven t openly admitted it to myself  but i think i have felt cut out by bliss .  perhaps i seek to  get even  by petulantly keeping things from you .  childish  i suppose .     golan .     i said it was childish  didn t i .  but where is the person who isn t childish now and then .  however  we are friends .  we ve settled that and therefore i will play no further games .  we re going to comporellon .     comporellon .   said pelorat  for the moment not remembering .    surely you recall my friend  the traitor  munn li compor .  we three met on sayshell .    pelorat s face assumed a visible expression of enlightenment .   of course i remember .  comporellon was the world of his ancestors .     if it was .  i don t necessarily believe anything compor said .  but comporellon is a known world  and compor said that its inhabitants knew of earth .  well  then  we ll go there and find out .  it may lead to nothing but it s the only starting point we have .    pelorat cleared his throat and looked dubious .   oh  my dear fellow  are you sure .     there s nothing about which to be either sure or not sure .  we have one starting point and  however feeble it might be  we have no choice but to follow it up .     yes  but if we re doing it on the basis of what compor told us  then perhaps we ought to consider everything he told us .  i seem to remember that he told us  most emphatically  that earth did not exist as a living planet that its surface was radioactive and that it was utterly lifeless .  and if that is so  then we are going to comporellon for nothing .      .   the three were lunching in the dining room  virtually filling it as they did so .    this is very good   said pelorat  with considerable satisfaction .   is this part of our original terminus supply .     no  not at all   said trevize .   that s long gone .  this is part of the supplies we bought on sayshell  before we headed out toward gaia .  unusual  isn t it .  some sort of seafood  but rather crunchy .  as for this stuff i was under the impression it was cabbage when i bought it  but it doesn t taste anything like it .    bliss listened but said nothing .  she picked at the food on her own plate gingerly .   pelorat said gently   you ve got to eat  dear .     i know  pel  and i m eating .    trevize said  with a touch of impatience he couldn t quite suppress   we do have gaian food  bliss .     i know   said bliss   but i would rather conserve that .  we don t know how long we will be out in space and eventually i must learn to eat isolate food .      is that so bad .  or must gaia eat only gaia .    bliss sighed .   actually  there s a saying of ours that goes   when gaia eats gaia  there is neither loss nor gain .   it is no more than a transfer of consciousness up and down the scale .  whatever i eat on gaia is gaia and when much of it is metabolized and becomes me  it is still gaia .  in fact  by the fact that i eat  some of what i eat has a chance to participate in a higher intensity of consciousness  while  of course  other portions of it are turned into waste of one sort or another and therefore sink in the scale of consciousness .    she took a firm bite of her food  chewed vigorously for a moment  swallowed  and said   it represents a vast circulation .  plants grow and are eaten by animals .  animals eat and are eaten .  any organism that dies is incorporated into the cells of molds  decay bacteria  and so on still gaia .  in this vast circulation of consciousness  even inorganic matter participates  and everything in the circulation has its chance of periodically participating in a high intensity of consciousness .     all this   said trevize   can be said of any world .  every atom in me has a long history during which it may have been part of many living things  including human beings  and during which it may also have spent long periods as part of the sea  or in a lump of coal  or in a rock  or as a portion of the wind blowing upon us .     on gaia  however   said bliss   all atoms are also continually part of a higher planetary consciousness of which you know nothing .     well  what happens  then   said trevize   to these vegetables from sayshell that you are eating .  do they become part of gaia .     they do rather slowly .  and the wastes i excrete as slowly cease being part of gaia .  after all  what leaves me is altogether lacking in contact with gaia .  it lacks even the less direct hyperspatial contact that i can maintain  thanks to my high level of conscious intensity .  it is this hyperspatial contact that causes non gaian food to become part of gaia slowly once i eat it .     what about the gaian food in our stores .  will that slowly become nongaian .  if so  you had better eat it while you can .     there is no need to be concerned about that   said bliss .   our gaian stores have been treated in such a way that they will remain part of gaia over a long interval .    pelorat said  suddenly   but what will happen when we eat the gaian food .  for that matter  what happened to us when we ate gaian food on gaia itself .  are we ourselves slowly turning into gaia    bliss shook her head and a peculiarly disturbed expression crossed her face .   no  what you ate was lost to us .  or at least the portions that were metabolized into your tissues were lost to us .  what you excreted stayed gaia or very slowly became gaia so that in the end the balance was maintained  but numerous atoms of gaia became non gaia as a result of your visit to us .     why was that .   asked trevize curiously .    because you would not have been able to endure the conversion  even a very partial one .  you were our guests  brought to our world under compulsion  in a manner of speaking  and we had to protect you from danger  even at the cost of the loss of tiny fragments of gaia .  it was a willing price we paid  but not a happy one .     we regret that   said trevize   but are you sure that non gaian food  or some kinds of non gaian food  might not  in their turn  harm you .     no   said bliss .   what is edible for you would be edible to me .  i merely have the additional problem of metabolizing such food into gaia as well as into my own tissues .  it represents a psychological barrier that rather spoils my enjoyment of the food and causes me to eat slowly  but i will overcome that with time .     what about infection .   said pelorat  in high pitched alarm .   i can t understand why i didn t think of this earlier .  bliss .  any world you land on is likely to have microorganisms against which you have no defense and you will die of some simple infectious disease .  trevize  we must turn back .     don t be panicked  pel dear   said bliss  smiling .   microorganisms  too  are assimilated into gaia when they are part of my food  or when they enter my body in any other way .  if they seem to be in the process of doing harm  they will be assimilated the more quickly  and once they are gaia  they will do me no harm .    the meal drew to its end and pelorat sipped at his spiced and heated mixture of fruit juices .   dear me   he said  licking his lips   i think it is time to change the subject again .  it does seem to me that my sole occupation on board ship is subject changing .  why is that .    trevize said solemnly   because bliss and i cling to whatever subjects we discuss  even to the death .  we depend upon you  janov  to save our sanity .  what subject do you want to change to  old friend .     i ve gone through my reference material on comporellon and the entire sector of which it is part is rich in legends of age .  they set their settlement far back in time  in the first millennium of hyperspatial travel .  comporellon even speaks of a legendary founder named benbally  though they don t say when he came from .  they say that the original name of their planet was benbally world .     and how much truth is there in that  in your opinion  janov .     a kernel  perhaps  but who can guess what the kernel might be .     i never heard of anyone named benbally in actual history .  have you .     no  i haven t  but you know that in the late imperial era there was a deliberate suppression of pre imperial history .  the emperors  in the turbulent last centuries of the empire  were anxious to reduce local patriotism since they considered it  with ample justification  to be a disintegrating influence .  in almost every sector of the galaxy  therefore  true history  with complete records and accurate chronology  begins only with the days when trantor s influence made itself felt and the sector in question had allied itself to the empire or been annexed by it .     i shouldn t think that history would be that easy to eradicate   said trevize .    in many ways  it isn t   said pelorat   but a determined and powerful government can weaken it greatly .  if it is sufficiently weakened  early history comes to depend on scattered material and tends to degenerate into folk tales .  invariably such folk tales will fill with exaggeration and come to show the sector to be older and more powerful than  in all likelihood  it ever really was .  and no matter how silly a particular legend is  or how impossible it might be on the very face of it  it becomes a matter of patriotism among the locals to believe it .  i can show you tales from every corner of the galaxy that speak of original colonization as having taken place from earth itself  though that is not always the name they give the parent planet .     what else do they call it .     any of a number of names .  they call it the only  sometimes  and sometimes  the oldest .  or they call it the mooned world  which  according to some authorities is a reference to its giant satellite .  others claim it means  lost world  and that  mooned  is a version of  marooned   a pre galactic word meaning  lost  or  abandoned .     trevize said gently   janov  stop .  you ll continue forever with your authorities and counterauthorities .  these legends are everywhere  you say .     oh yes  my dear fellow .  quite .  you have only to go through them to gain a feel for this human habit of beginning with some seed of truth and layering about it shell after shell of pretty falsehood in the fashion of the oysters of rhampora that build pearls about a piece of grit .  i came across just exactly that metaphor once when     janov .  stop again .  tell me  is there anything about comporellon s legends that is different from others .     oh .   pelorat gazed at trevize blankly for a moment .   different .  well  they claim that earth is relatively nearby and that s unusual .  on most worlds that speak of earth  under whatever name they choose  there is a tendency to be vague about its location placing it indefinitely far away or in some never never land .    trevize said   yes  as some on sayshell told us that gaia was located in hyperspace .    bliss laughed .   trevize cast her a quick glance .   it s true .  that s what we were told .     i don t disbelieve it .  it s amusing  that s all .  it is  of course  what we want them to believe .  we only ask to be left alone right now  and where can we be safer and more secure than in hyperspace .  if we re not there  we re as good as there  if people believe that to be our location .     yes   said trevize dryly   and in the same way there is something that causes people to believe that earth doesn t exist  or that it is far away  or that it has a radioactive crust .     except   said pelorat   that the comporellians believe it to be relatively close to themselves .     but nevertheless give it a radioactive crust .  one way or another every people with an earth legend consider earth to be unapproachable .     that s more or less right   said pelorat .   trevize said   many on sayshell believed gaia to be nearby  some even identified its star correctly  and yet all considered it unapproachable .  there may be some comporellians who insist that earth is radioactive and dead  but who can identify its star .  we will then approach it  unapproachable though they may consider it .  we did exactly that in the case of gaia .    bliss said   gaia was willing to receive you  trevize .  you were helpless in our grip but we had no thought of harming you .  what if earth  too  is powerful  but not benevolent .  what then .     i must in any case try to reach it  and accept the consequences .  however  that is my task .  once i locate earth and head for it  it will not be too late for you to leave .  i will put you off on the nearest foundation world  or take you back to gaia  if you insist  and then go on to earth alone .     my dear chap   said pelorat  in obvious distress .   don t say such things .  i wouldn t dream of abandoning you .     or i of abandoning pel   said bliss  as she reached out a hand to touch pelorat s cheek .    very well  then .  it won t be long before we re ready to take the jump to comporellon and thereafter  let us hope  it will be   on to earth .      part two   comporellon    chapter      at the entry station      .     bliss  entering their chamber  said   did trevize tell you that we are going make the jump and go through hyperspace any moment now .    pelorat  who was bent over his viewing disk  looked up  and said   actually  he just looked in and told me  within the half hour .      i don t like the thought of it  pel .  i ve never liked the jump .  i get a funny inside out feeling .    pelorat looked a bit surprised .   i had not thought of you as a space traveler  bliss dear .     i m not particularly  and i don t mean that this is so only in my aspect as a component .  gaia itself has no occasion for regular space travel .  by my our gaia s very nature  i we gaia don t explore  trade  or space junket .  still  there is the necessity of having someone at the entry stations     as when we were fortunate enough to meet you .     yes  pel .   she smiled at him affectionately .   or even to visit sayshell and other stellar regions  for various reasons usually clandestine .  but  clandestine or not  that always means the jump and  of course  when any part of gaia jumps  all of gaia feels it .     that s too bad   said pel .    it could be worse .  the large mass of gaia is not undergoing the jump  so the effect is greatly diluted .  however  i seem to feel it much more than most of gaia .  as i keep trying to tell trevize  though all of gaia is gaia  the individual components are not identical .  we have our differences  and my makeup is  for some reason  particularly sensitive to the jump .     wait .   said pelorat  suddenly remembering .   trevize explained that to me once .  it s in ordinary ships that you have the worst of the sensation .  in ordinary ships  one leaves the galactic gravitational field on entering hyperspace  and comes back to it on returning to ordinary space .  it s the leaving and returning that produces the sensation .  but the far star is a gravitic ship .  it is independent of the gravitational field  and does not truly leave it or return to it .  for that reason  we won t feel a thing .  i can assure you of that  dear  out of personal experience .     but that s delightful .  i wish i had thought to discuss the matter earlier .  i would have saved myself considerable apprehension .     that s an advantage in another way   said pelorat  feeling an expansion of spirit in his unusual role as explainer of matters astronautic .   the ordinary ship has to recede from large masses such as stars for quite a long distance through ordinary space in order to make the jump .  part of the reason is that the closer to a star  the more intense the gravitational field  and the more pronounced are the sensations of a jump .  then  too  the more intense the gravitational field the more complicated the equations that must be solved in order to conduct the jump safely and end at the point in ordinary space you wish to end at .    in a gravitic ship  however  there is no jump sensation to speak of .  in addition  this ship has a computer that is a great deal more advanced than ordinary computers and it can handle complex equations with unusual skill and speed .  the result is that instead of having to move away from a star for a couple of weeks just to reach a safe and comfortable distance for a jump  the far star need travel for only two or three days .  this is especially so since we are not subject to a gravitational field and  therefore  to inertial effects i admit i don t understand that  but that s what trevize tells me and can accelerate much more rapidly than an ordinary ship could .    bliss said   that s fine  and it s to trev s credit that he can handle this unusual ship .    pelorat frowned slightly .   please  bliss .  say  trevize .      i do .  i do .  in his absence  however  i relax a little .     don t .  you don t want to encourage the habit even slightly  dear .  he s so sensitive about it .     not about that .  he s sensitive about me .  he doesn t like me .     that s not so   said pelorat earnestly .   i talked to him about that .   now  now  don t frown .  i was extraordinarily tactful  dear child .  he assured me he did not dislike you .  he is suspicious of gaia and unhappy over the fact that he has had to make it into the future of humanity .  we have to make allowances for that .  he ll get over it as he gradually comes to understand the advantages of gaia .     i hope so  but it s not just gaia .  whatever he may tell you  pel and remember that he s very fond of you and doesn t want to hurt your feelings he dislikes me personally .     no  bliss .  he couldn t possibly .     not everyone is forced to love me simply because you do  pel .  let me explain .  trev all right  trevize thinks i m a robot .    a look of astonishment suffused pelorat s ordinarily stolid features .  he said   surely he can t think you re an artificial human being .     why is that so surprising .  gaia was settled with the help of robots .  that s a known fact .     robots might help  as machines night  but it was people who settled gaia  people from earth .  that s what trevize thinks .  i know he does .     there is nothing in gaia s memory about earth as i told you and trevize .  however  in our oldest memories there are still some robots  even after three thousand years  working at the task of completing the modification of gaia into a habitable world .  we were at that time also forming gaia as a planetary consciousness that took a long time  pel dear  and that s another reason why our early memories are dim  and perhaps it wasn t a matter of earth wiping them out  as trevize thinks     yes  bliss   said pelorat anxiously   but what of the robots .     well  as gaia formed  the robots left .  we did not want a gaia that included robots  for we were  and are  convinced that a robotic component is  in the long run  harmful to a human society  whether isolate in nature or planetary .  i don t know how we came to that conclusion but it is possible that it is based on events dating back to a particularly early time in galactic history  so that gaia s memory does not extend back to it .     if the robots left     yes  but what if some remained behind .  what if i am one of them fifteen thousand years old perhaps .  trevize suspects that .    pelorat shook his head slowly .   but you re not .     are you sure you believe that .     of course i do .  you re not a robot .     how do you know .     bliss  i know .  there s nothing artificial about you .  if i don t know that  no one does .     isn t it possible i may be so cleverly artificial that in every respect  from largest to smallest  i am indistinguishable from the natural .  if i were  how could you tell the difference between me and a true human being .    pelorat said   i don t think it s possible for you to be so cleverly artificial .     what if it were possible  despite what you think .     i just don t believe it .     then let s just consider it is a hypothetical case .  if i were an indistinguishable robot  how would you feel about it .     well  i i    to be specific .  how would you feel about making love to a robot .    pelorat snapped the thumb and mid finger of his right hand  suddenly .   you know  there are legends of women falling in love with artificial men  and vice versa .  i always thought there was an allegorical significance to that and never imagined the tales could represent literal truth .   of course  golan and i never even heard the word  robot  till we landed on sayshell  but  now that i think of it  those artificial men and women must have been robots .  apparently  such robots did exist in early historic times .  that means the legends should be reconsidered    he fell into silent thought  and  after bliss had waited a moment  she suddenly clapped her hands sharply .  pelorat jumped .    pel dear   said bliss .   you re using your mythography to escape the question .  the question is  how would you feel about making love to a robot .    he stared at her uneasily .   a truly undistinguishable one .  one that you couldn t tell from a human being .     yes .     it seems to me  then  that a robot that can in no way be distinguished from a human being is a human being .  if you were such a robot  you would be nothing but a human being to me .     that s what i wanted to hear you say  pel .    pelorat waited  then said   well  then  now that you ve heard me say it  dear  aren t you going to tell me that you are a natural human being and that i don t have to wrestle with hypothetical situations .     no .  i will do no such thing .  you ve defined a natural human being as an object that has all the properties of a natural human being .  if you are satisfied that i have all those properties  then that ends the discussion .  we ve got the operational definition and need no other .  after all  how do i know that you re not just a robot who happens to be indistinguishable from a human being .     because i tell you that i am not .     ah  but if you were a robot that was indistinguishable from a human being  you might be designed to tell me you were a natural human being  and you might even be programmed to believe it yourself .  the operational definition is all we have  and all we can have .    she put her arms about pelorat s neck and kissed him .  the kiss grew more passionate  and prolonged itself until pelorat managed to say  in somewhat muffled fashion   but we promised trevize not to embarrass him by converting this ship into a honeymooners  haven .    bliss said coaxingly   let s be carried away and not leave ourselves any time to think of promises .    pelorat  troubled  said   but i can t do that  dear .  i know it must irritate you  bliss  but i am constantly thinking and i am constitutionally averse to letting myself be carried away by emotion .  it s a lifelong habit  and probably very annoying to others .  i ve never lived with a woman who didn t seem to object to it sooner or later .  my first wife but i suppose it would be inappropriate to discuss that     rather inappropriate  yes  but not fatally so .  you re not my first lover either .     oh .   said pelorat  rather at a loss  and then  aware of bliss s small smile  he said   i mean  of course not .  i wouldn t expect myself to have been anyway  my first wife didn t like it .     but i do .  i find your endless plunging into thought attractive .     i can t believe that  but i do have another thought .  robot or human  that doesn t matter .  we agree on that .  however  i am an isolate and you know it .  i am not part of gaia  and when we are intimate  you re sharing emotions outside gaia even when you let me participate in gaia for a short period  and it may not be the same intensity of emotion then that you would experience if it were gaia loving gaia .    bliss said   loving you  pel  has its own delight .  i look no farther than that .     but it s not just a matter of you loving me .  you aren t merely you .  what if gaia considers it a perversion .     if it did  i would know  for i am gaia .  and since i have delight in you  gaia does .  when we make love  all of gaia shares the sensation to some degree or other .  when i say i love you  that means gaia loves you  although it is only the part that i am that is assigned the immediate role .   you seem confused .     being an isolate  bliss  i don t quite grasp it .     one can always form an analogy with the body of an isolate .  when you whistle a tune  your entire body  you as an organism  wishes to whistle the tune  but the immediate task of doing so is assigned to your lips  tongue  and lungs .  your right big toe does nothing .     it might tap to the tune .     but that is not necessary to the act of whistling .  the tapping of the big toe is not the action itself but is a response to the action  and  to be sure  all parts of gaia might well respond in some small way or other to my emotion  as i respond to theirs .    pelorat said   i suppose there s no use feeling embarrassed about this .     none at all .     but it does give me a queer sense of responsibility .  when i try to make you happy  i find that i must be trying to make every last organism on gaia happy .     every last atom but you do .  you add to the sense of communal joy that i let you share briefly .  i suppose your contribution is too small to be easi y measurable  but it is there  and knowing it is there should increase your joy .    pelorat said   i wish i could be sure that golan is sufficiently busy with his maneuvering through hyperspace to remain in the pilot room for quite a while .     you wish to honeymoon  do you .     i do .     than get a sheet of paper  write  honeymoon haven  on it  affix it to the outside of the door  and if he wants to enter  that s his problem .    pelorat did so  and it was during the pleasurable proceedings that followed that the far star made the jump .  neither pelorat nor bliss detected the action  nor would they have  had they been paying attention .      .   it had been only a matter of a few months since pelorat had met trevize and had left terminus for the first time .  until then  for the more than halfcentury  galactic standard  of his life  he had been utterly planet bound .   in his own mind  he had in those months become an old space dog .  he had seen three planets from space  terminus itself  sayshell  and gaia .  and on the viewscreen  he now saw a fourth  albeit through a computer controlled telescopic device .  the fourth was comporellon .   and again  for the fourth time  he was vaguely disappointed .  somehow  he continued to feel that looking down upon a habitable world from space meant seeing an outline of its continents against a surrounding sea  or  if it were a dry world  the outline of its lakes against a surrounding body of land .   it was never so .   if a world was habitable  it had an atmosphere as well as a hydrosphere .  and if it had both air and water  it had clouds  and if it had clouds  it had an obscured view .  once again  then  pelorat found himself looking down on white swirls with an occasional glimpse of pale blue or rusty brown .   he wondered gloomily if anyone could identify a world if a view of it from  say  three hundred thousand kilometers  were cast upon a screen .  how does one tell one cloud swirl from another .   bliss looked at pelorat with some concern .   what is it  pel .  you seem to be unhappy .     i find that all planets look alike from space .    trevize said   what of that  janov .  so does every shoreline on terminus  when it is on the horizon  unless you know what you re looking for a particular mountain peak  or a particular offshore islet of characteristic shape .     i dare say   said pelorat  with clear dissatisfaction   but what do you look for in a mass of shifting clouds .  and even if you try  before you can decide  you re likely to be moving into the dark side .    look a little more carefully  janov .  if you follow the shape of the clouds  you see that they tend to fall into a pattern that circles the planet and that moves about a center .  that center is more or less at one of the poles .     which one .   asked bliss with interest .    since  relative to ourselves  the planet is rotating in clockwise fashion  we are looking down  by definition  upon the south pole .  since the center seems to be about fifteen degrees from the terminator the planet s line of shadow and the planetary axis is tilted twenty one degrees to the perpendicular of its plane of revolution  we re either in mid spring or mid summer depending on whether the pole is moving away from the terminator or toward it .  the computer can calculate its orbit and tell me in short order if i were to ask it .  the capital is on the northern side of the equator so it is either in mid fall or mid winter .    pelorat frowned .   you can tell all that .   he looked at the cloud layer as though he thought it would  or should  speak to him now  but  of course  it didn t .    not only that   said trevize   but if you ll look at the polar regions  you ll see that there are no breaks in the cloud layer as there are away from the poles .  actually  there are breaks  but through the breaks you see ice  so it s a matter of white on white .     ah   said pelorat .   i suppose you expect that at the poles .     of habitable planets  certainly .  lifeless planets might be airless or waterless  or might have certain stigmata showing that the clouds are not water a clouds  or that the ice is not water ice .  this planet lacks those stigmata  so we  know we are looking at water clouds and water ice .    the next thing we notice is the size of the area of unbroken white on the day side of the terminator  and to the experienced eye it is at once seen v larger than average .  furthermore  you can detect a certain orange glint  a quite faint one  to the reflected light  and that means comporellon s sun if rather cooler than terminus s sun .  although comporellon is closer to its sun than terminus is to hers  it is not sufficiently closer to make up for its star s lower temperature .  therefore  comporellon is a cold world as habitable worlds go .     you read it like a film  old chap   said pelorat admiringly .    don t be too impressed   said trevize  smiling affectionately .   the computer has given me the applicable statistics of the world  including its slightly low average temperature .  it is easy to deduce something you already know .  in fact  comporellon is at the edge of an ice age and would be having one  if the configuration of its continents were more suitable to such a condition .    bliss bit at her lower lip .   i don t like a cold world .     we ve got warm clothing   said trevize .    that doesn t matter .  human beings aren t adapted to cold weather  rally .  we don t have thick coats of hair or feathers  or a subcutaneous layer of blubber .  for a world to have cold weather seems to indicate a certain indifference to the welfare of its own parts .    trevize said   is gaia a uniformly mild world .     most of it  yes .  there are some cold areas for cold adapted plants and animals  and some hot areas for heat adapted plants and animals  but most parts are uniformly mild  never getting uncomfortably hot or uncomfortably cold  for those between  including human beings  of course .     human beings  of course .  all parts of gaia are alive and equal in that respect  but some  like human beings  are obviously more equal than other     don t be foolishly sarcastic   said bliss  with a trace of waspishness .   the level and intensity of consciousness and awareness are important .  a human being is a more useful portion of gaia than a rock of the same weight would be  and the properties and functions of gaia as a whole are necessarily weighted in the direction of the human being not as much so as on your isolate worlds  however .  what s more  there are times when it is weighted in other directions  when that is needed for gaia as a whole .  it might even  at long intervals  be weighted in the direction of the rocky interior .  that  too  demands attention or  in the lack of that attention all parts of gaia might suffer .  we wouldn t want an unnecessary volcanic eruption  would we .     no   said trevize .   not an unnecessary one .     you re not impressed  are you .     look   said trevize .   we have worlds that are colder than average and worlds that are warmer  worlds that are tropical forests to a large extent  and worlds that are vast savannahs .  no two worlds are alike  and every one of them is home to those who are used to it .  i am used to the relative mildness of terminus we ve tamed it to an almost gaian moderation  actually but i like to get away  at least temporarily  to something different .  what we have  bliss  that gaia doesn t have  is variation .  if gaia expands into galaxia  will every world in the galaxy be forced into mildness .  the sameness would be unbearable .    bliss said   if that is so  and if variety seems desirable  variety will be maintained .     as a gift from the central committee  so to speak .   said trevize dryly .   and as little of it as they can bear to part with .  i d rather leave it to nature .     but you haven t left it to nature .  every habitable world in the galaxy has been modified .  every single one was found in a state of nature that was uncomfortable for humanity  and every single one was modified until it was as mild as could be managed .  if this world here is cold  i am certain that is because its inhabitants couldn t warm it any further without unacceptable expense .  and even so  the portions they actually inhabit we can be sure are artificially warmed into mildness .  so don t be so loftily virtuous about leaving it to nature .    trevize said   you speak for gaia  i suppose .     i always speak for gaia .  i am gaia .     then if gaia is so certain of its own superiority  why did you require my decision .  why have you not gone ahead without me .    bliss paused  as though to collect her thoughts .  she said   because it is not wise to trust one s self overmuch .  we naturally see our virtues with clearer eyes than we see our defects .  we are anxious to do what is right  not necessarily what seems right to us  but what is right  objectively  if such a thing as objective right exists .  you seem to be the nearest approach to objective right that we can find  so we are guided by you .     so objectively right   said trevize sadly   that i don t even understand my own decision and i seek its justification .     you ll find it   said bliss .    i hope so   said trevize .    actually  old chap   said pelorat   it seems to me that this recent exchange was won rather handily by bliss .  why don t you recognize the fact that her arguments justify your decision that gaia is the wave of the future for humanity .     because   said trevize harshly   i did not know those arguments at the time i made my decision .  i knew none of these details about gaia .  something else influenced me  at least unconsciously  something that doesn t depend upon gaian detail  but must be more fundamental .  it is that which i moil find out .    pelorat held up a placating hand .   don t be angry  golan .     i m not angry .  i m just under rather unbearable tension .  i don t want to  be the focus of the galaxy .    bliss said   i don t blame you for that  trevize  and i m truly sorry that your own makeup has somehow forced you into the post .   when will we be landing on comporellon .     in three days   said trevize   and only after we stop at one of the entry stations in orbit about it .    pelorat said   there shouldn t be any problem with that  should there .    trevize shrugged .   it depends on the number of ships approaching ft world  the number of entry stations that exist  and  most of all  on the particular rules for permitting and refusing admittance .  such rules change from time to time .    pelorat said indignantly   what do you mean refusing admittance .    can they refuse admittance to citizens of the foundation .  isn t comporellan part of the foundation dominion .     well  yes and no .  there s a delicate matter of legalism about the point and i m not sure how comporellon interprets it .  i suppose there s a chance we ll be refused admission  but i don t think it s a large chance .     and if we are refused  what do we do .     i m not sure   said trevize .   let s wait and see what happens before we wear ourselves out making contingency plans .       .   they were close enough to comporellon now for it to appear as a substantial globe without telescopic enlargement .  when such enlargement was added  however  the entry stations themselves could be seen .  they were farther out than most of the orbiting structures about the planet and they were well lit .   approaching as the far star was from the direction of the planet s southern pole  half its globe was sunlit constantly .  the entry stations on its night side were naturally more clearly seen as sparks of light .  they were evenly spaced in an arc about the planet .  six of them were visible  plus six on the day side undoubtedly  and all were circling the planet at even and identical speeds .   pelorat  a little awed at the sight  said   there are other lights closer to the planet .  what are they .    trevize said   i don t know the planet in detail so i can t tell you .  some might be orbiting factories or laboratories or observatories  or even populated townships .  some planets prefer to keep all orbiting objects outwardly dark  except for the entry stations .  terminus does  for instance .  comporellon conducts itself on a more liberal principle  obviously .     which entry station do we go to  golan .     it depends on them .  i ve sent in my request to land on comporellon and we ll eventually get our directions as to which entry station to go to  and when .  much depends on how many incoming ships are trying to make entry at present .  if there are a dozen ships lined up at each station  we will have no choice but to be patient .    bliss said   i ve only been at hyperspatial distances from gaia twice before  and those were both when i was at or near sayshell .  i ve never been at anything like this distance .    trevize looked at her sharply .   does it matter .  you re still gaia  aren t you .    for a moment  bliss looked irritated  but then dissolved into what was almost an embarrassed titter .   i must admit you ve caught me this time  trevize .  there is a double meaning in the word  gaia .   it can be used to refer to the physical planet as a solid globular object in space .  it can also be used to refer to the living object that includes that globe .  properly speaking  we should use two different words for these two different concepts  but gaians always know from the context what is being referred to .  i admit that an isolate might be puzzled at times .     well  then   said trevize   admitting that you are many thousands of parsecs from gaia as globe  are you still part of gaia as organism .     referring to the organism  i am still gaia .     no attenuation .     not in essence .  i m sure i ve already told you there is some added complexity in remaining gaia across hyperspace  but i remain gaia .    trevize said   does it occur to you that gaia may be viewed as a galactic kraken the tentacled monster of the legends with its tentacles reaching everywhere .  you have but to put a few gaians on each of the populated worlds and you will virtually have galaxia right there .  in fact .  you have probably done exactly that .  where are your gaians located .  i presume that one or more are on terminus and one or more are on trantor .  how much farther does this go .    bliss looked distinctly uncomfortable .   i have said i won t lie to you  trevize  but that doesn t mean i feel compelled to give you the whole truth .  there are some things you have no need to know  and the position and identity of individual bits of gaia are among them .     do i need to know the reason for the existence of those tentacles  bliss  even if i don t know where they are .     it is the opinion of gaia that you do not .     i presume  though  that i may guess .  you believe you serve as the guardians of the galaxy .     we are anxious to have a stable and secure galaxy  a peaceful and prosperous one .  the seldon plan  as originally worked out by hari seldon at least  is designed to develop a second galactic empire  one that is more stable and more workable than the first was .  the plan  which has been continually modified and improved by the second foundation  has appeared to be working well so far .     but gaia doesn t want a second galactic empire in the classic sense  does it .  you want galaxia a living galaxy .     since you permit it  we hope  in time  to have galaxia .  if you had not permitted it  we would have striven for seldon s second empire and made it as secure as we could .     but what is wrong with    his ear caught the soft  burring signal .  trevize said   the computer is signaling me .  i suppose it is receiving directions concerning the entry station .  i ll be back .    he stepped into the pilot room and placed his hands on those marked out on the desk top and found that there were directions for the specific entry station he was to approach its co ordinates with reference to the line from comporellon s center to its north pole the prescribed route of approach .   trevize signaled his acceptance  and then sat back for a moment .   the seldon plan .  he had not thought of it for quite a time .  the fire galactic empire had crumbled and for five hundred years the foundation had grown  first in competition with that empire  and then upon its ruins all in accordance with the plan .   there had been the interruption of the mule  which  for a time  had threatened to shiver the plan into fragments  but the foundation had pulled through probably with the help of the ever hidden second foundation possibly with the help of the even better hidden gaia .   now the plan was threatened by something more serious than the mule had ever been .  it was to be diverted from a renewal of empire to something utterly different from anything in history galaxia .  and he himself had agreed to that .   but why .  was there a flaw in the plan .  a basic flaw .   for one flashing moment  it seemed to trevize that this flaw did indeed exist and that he knew what it was  that he had known what it was when he made his decision but the knowledge  .   .   .  if that were what it was  .   .   .  vanished as fast as it came  and it left him with nothing .   perhaps it was all only an illusion  both when he had made his decision  and now .  after all  he knew nothing about the plan beyond the basic assumptions that validated psychohistory .  apart from that  he knew no detail  and certainly not a single scrap of its mathematics .   he closed his eyes and thought   there was nothing .   might it be the added power he received from the computer .  he placed his hands on the desk top and felt the warmth of the computer s hands embracing them .  he closed his eyes and once more he thought   there was still nothing .      .   the comporellian who boarded the ship wore a holographic identity card .  it displayed his chubby  lightly bearded face with remarkable fidelity  and underneath it was his name  a .  kendray .   he was rather short  and his body was as softly rounded as his face was .  he had a fresh and easygoing look and manner  and he stared about the ship with clear amazement .   he said   how did you get down this fast .  we weren t expecting you for two hours .     it s a new model ship   said trevize  with noncommittal politeness .   kendray was not quite the young innocent he looked  however .  he stepped into the pilot room and said at once   gravitic .    trevize saw no point in denying anything that was apparently that obvious .  he said tonelessly   yes .     very interesting .  you hear of them  but you never see them somehow .  motors in the hull .     that s so .    kendray looked at the computer .   computer circuits  likewise .     that s so .  anyway  i m told so .  i ve never looked .     oh well .  what i need is the ship s documentation  engine number  place of manufacture  identification code  the whole patty cake .  it s all in the computer  i m sure  and it can probably turn out the formal card i need in half a second .    it took very little more than that .  kendray looked about again .   you three all the people on board .    trevize said   that s right .     any live animals .  plants .  state of health .     no .  no .  and good   said trevize crisply .    um .   said kendray  making notes .   could you put your hand in here .  just routine .   right hand  please .    trevize looked at the device without favor .  it was being used more and more commonly  and was growing quickly more elaborate .  you could almost tell the backwardness of a world at a glance by the backwardness of its microdetector .  there were now few worlds  however backward  that didn t have one at all .  the start had come with the final breakup of the empire  as each fragment of the whole grew increasingly anxious to protect itself from the diseases and alien microorganisms of all the others .    what is that .   asked bliss  in a low and interested voice  craning her head to see it first on one side  then the other .   pelorat said   a microdetector  i believe they call it .    trevize added   it s nothing mysterious .  it s a device that automatically checks a portion of your body  inside and out  for any microorganism capable of transmitting disease .     this will classify the microorganisms  too   said kendray  with rather more than a hint of pride .   it s been worked out right here on comporellon .   and if you don t mind  i still want your right hand .    trevize inserted his right hand  and watched as a series of small red markings danced along a set of horizontal lines .  kendray touched a contact and a facsimile in color appeared at once .   if you ll sign that  sir   he said .   trevize did so .   how badly off am i .   he asked .   i m not in any great danger  am i .    kendray said   i m not a physician  so i can t say in detail  but it shows none of the marks that would require you to be turned away or to be put in quarantine .  that s all i m interested in .     what a lucky break for me   said trevize dryly  shaking his hand to rid himself of the slight tingle he felt .    you  sir   said kendray .   pelorat inserted his hand with a certain hesitancy  then signed the facsimile .    and you  ma am .        a few moments later  kendray was staring at the result  saying   i never saw anything like this before .   he looked up at bliss with an expression of awe .   you re negative .  altogether .     bliss smiled engagingly .   how nice .     yes  ma am .  i envy you .   he looked back at the first facsimile  and said   your identification  mr .  trevize .    trevize presented it .  kendray  glancing at it  again looked up in surprise .   councilman of the terminus legislature .     that s right .     high official of the foundation .    trevize said coolly   exactly right .  so let s get through with this quickly  shall we .     you re captain of the ship .     yes  i am .     purpose of visit .     foundation security  and that s all the answer i m going to give you .  do you understand that .     yes  sir .  how long do you intend to stay .     i don t know .  perhaps a week .     very well  sir .  and this other gentleman .     he is dr .  janov pelorat   said trevize .   you have his signature there and i vouch for him .  he is a scholar of terminus and he is my assistant in this business of my visit .     i understand  sir  but i must see his identification .  rules are rules  i m afraid .  i hope you understand  sir .    pelorat presented his papers .   kendray nodded .   and you  miss .    trevize said quietly   no need to bother the lady .  i vouch for her  too .     yes  sir .  but i need the identification .    bliss said   i m afraid i don t have any papers  sir .    kendray frowned .   i beg your pardon .    trevize said   the young lady didn t bring any with her .  an oversight .  it s perfectly all right .  i ll take full responsibility .    kendray said   i wish i could let you do that  but i m not allowed .  the responsibility is mine .  under the circumstances  it s not terribly important .  there should be no difficulty getting duplicates .  the young woman  i presume  is from terminus .     no  she s not .     from somewhere in foundation territory  then .     as a matter of fact  she isn t .    kendray looked at bliss keenly  then at trevize .   that s a complication  councilman .  it may take additional time to obtain a duplicate from some non foundation world .  since you re not a foundation citizen  miss bliss  i must have the name of your world of birth and of the world of which you re a citizen .  you will then have to wait for duplicate papers to arrive .    trevize said   see here  mr .  kendray .  i see no reason why there need be any delay whatever .  i am a high official of the foundation government and i am here on a mission of great importance .  i must not be delayed by a matter of trivial paperwork .     the choice isn t mine  councilman .  if it were up to me  i d let you down to comporellon right now  but i have a thick book of rules that guides my every action .  i ve got to go by the book or i get it thrown at me .     f course   i presume there must be some comporellian government figure who s waiting for you .  if you ll tell me who it is  i will contact him  and if he orders me to let you through  then that s it .    trevize hesitated a moment .   that would not be politic  mr .  kendray .  may i speak with your immediate superior .     you certainly may  but you can t just see him off hand     i m sure he will come at once when he understands he s speaking to a foundation official     actually   said kendray   just between us  that would make matters worse .  we re not part of the foundation metropolitan territory  you know .  we come under the heading of an associated power  and we take it seriously .  the people are anxious not to appear to be foundation puppets i m using the popular expression only  you understand and they bend backward to demonstrate independence .  my superior would expect to get extra points if he resists doing a special favor for a foundation official .    trevize s expression darkened .   and you  too .    kendray shook his head .   i m below politics  sir .  no one gives me extra points for anything .  i m just lucky if they pay my salary .  and though i don t get extra points  i can get demerits  and quite easily  too .  i wish that were not so .     considering my position  you know  i can take care of you .     no  sir .  i m sorry if that sounds impertinent  but i don t think you can .   and  sir  it s embarrassing to say this  but please don t offer me anything valuable .  they make examples of officials who accept such things and they re pretty good at digging them out  these days .     i wasn t thinking of bribing you .  i m only thinking of what the mayor of terminus can do to you if you interfere with my mission .     councilman  i ll be perfectly safe as long as i can hide behind the rulebook .  if the members of the comporellian presidium get some sort of foundation discipline  that is their concern  and not mine .   but if it will help  sir  i can let you and dr .  pelorat through on your ship .  if you ll leave miss bliss behind at the entry station  we ll hold her for a time and send her down to the surface as soon as her duplicate papers come through .  if her papers should not be obtainable  for any reason  we will send her back to her world on commercial transportation .  i m afraid  though  that someone will have to pay her fare  in that ease .    trevize caught pelorat s expression at that  and said   mr .  kendray  may i speak to you privately in the pilot room .     very well  but i can t remain on board very much longer  or i ll be questioned .     this won t take long   said trevize .   in the pilot room  trevize made a show of closing the door tightly  then said  in a low voice   i ve been many places  mr .  kendray  but i ve never been anyplace where there has been such harsh emphasis on the minutiae of the rules of immigration  particularly for foundation people and foundation officials     but the young woman is not from the foundation .     even so .    kendray said   these things go in rhythms .  we ve had some scandals and  right now  things are tough .  if you ll come back next year  you might not have any trouble at all  but right now  i can do nothing .     try  mr .  kendray   said trevize  his voice growing mellow .   i m going to throw myself on your mercy and appeal to you  man to man .  pelorat and i have been on this mission for quite a while .  he and i .  just he and i .  we re good friends  but there s something lonely about it  if you get me .  some time ago  pelorat found this little lady .  i don t have to tell you what happened  but we decided to bring her along .  it keeps us healthy to make use of her now and then .    now the thing is pelorat s got a relationship back on terminus .  i m clear  you understand  but pelorat is an older man and he s got to the age when they get a little desperate .  they need their youth back  or something .  he can t give her up .  at the same time  if she s even mentioned  officially  there s going to be misery galore on terminus for old pelorat when he gets back .    there s no harm being done  you understand .  miss bliss  as she calls herself a good name considering her profession is not exactly a bright kid  that s not what we want her for .  do you have to mention her at all .  can t you just list me and pelorat on the ship .  only we were originally listed when we left terminus .  there need be no official notice of the woman .  after all  she s absolutely free of disease .  you noted that yourself .    kendray made a face .   i don t really want to inconvenience you .  i understand the situation and  believe me  i sympathize .  listen  if you think holding down a shift on this station for months at a time is any fun  think again .  and it isn t co educational  either  not on comporellon .   he shook his head .   and i have a wife  too  so i understand .   but  look  even if i let you through  as soon as they find out that the uh lady is without papers  she s in prison  you and mr .  pelorat are in the kind of trouble that will get back to terminus .  and i myself will surely be out of a job .     mr .  kendray   said trevize   trust me in this .  once i m on comporellon  i ll be safe .  i can talk about my mission to some of the right people and  when that s done  there ll be no further trouble .  i ll take full responsibility for what has happened here  if it ever comes up which i doubt .  what s more  i will recommend your promotion  and you will get it  because i ll see to it that terminus leans all over anyone who hesitates .   and we can give pelorat a break .    kendray hesitated  then said   all right .  i ll let you through but take a word of warning .  i start from this minute figuring out a way to save my butt if the matter comes up .  i don t intend to do one thing to save yours .  what s more i know how these things work on comporellon and you don t  and comporellon isn t an easy world for people who step out of line .     thank you  mr .  kendray   said trevize .   there ll be no trouble .  i assure you of that .      chapter      on comporellon     .   they were through .  the entry station had shrunk to a rapidly dimming star behind them  and in a couple of hours they would be crossing the cloud layer .   a gravitic ship did not have to brake its path by a long route of slow spiral contraction  but neither could it swoop downward too rapidly .  freedom from gravity did not mean freedom from air resistance .  the ship could descend in a straight line  but it was still a matter for caution  it could not be too fast .    where are we going to go .   asked pelorat  looking confused .   i can t tell one place in the clouds from another  old fellow .     no more can i   said trevize   but we have an official holographic map of comporellon  which gives the shape of the land masses and an exaggerated relief for both land heights and ocean depths and political subdivisions  too .  the map is in the computer and that will do the work .  it will match the planetary land sea design to the map  thus orienting the ship properly  and it will then take us to the capital by a cycloidic pathway .    pelorat said   if we go to the capital  we plunge immediately into the political vortex .  if the world is anti foundation  as the fellow at the entry station implied  we ll be asking for trouble .     on the other hand  it s bound to be the intellectual center of the planet  and if we want information  that s where we ll find it  if anywhere .  as for being anti foundation  i doubt that they will be able to display that too openly .  the mayor may have no great liking for me  but neither can she afford to have a councilman mistreated .  she would not care to allow the precedent to be established .    bliss had emerged from the toilet  her hands still damp from scrubbing .  she adjusted her underclothes with no sign of concern and said   by the way  i trust the excreta is thoroughly recycled .     no choice   said trevize .   how long do you suppose our water supply would last without recycling of excreta .  on what do you think those choicely flavored yeast cakes that we eat to lend spice to our frozen staples grow .   i hope that doesn t spoil your appetite  my efficient bliss .     why should it .  where do you suppose food and water come from on gaia  or on this planet  or on terminus .     on gaia   said trevize   the excreta is  of course  as alive as you are .     not alive .  conscious .  there is a difference .  the level of consciousness is  naturally  very low .    trevize sniffed in a disparaging way  but didn t try to answer .  he said   i m going into the pilot room to keep the computer company .  not that it needs me .    pelorat said   may we come in and help you keep it company .  i can t quite get used to the fact that it can get us down all by itself  that it can sense other ships  or storms  or whatever .    trevize smiled broadly .   get used to it  please .  the ship is far safer under the computer s control than it ever would be under mine .   but certainly  come on .  it will do you good to watch what happens .    they were over the sunlit side of the planet now for  as trevize explained  the map in the computer could be more easily matched to reality in the sunlight than in the dark .    that s obvious   said pelorat .    not at all obvious .  the computer will judge just as rapidly by the infrared light which the surface radiates even in the dark .  however  the longer waves of infrared don t allow the computer quite the resolution that visible light would .  that is  the computer doesn t see quite as finely and sharply by infrared  and where necessity doesn t drive  i like to make things as easy as possible for the computer .     what if the capital is on the dark side .     the chance is fifty fifty   said trevize   but if it is  once the map is matched by daylight  we can skim down to the capital quite unerringly even if it is in the dark .  and long before we come anywhere near the capital  we      be intersecting microwave beams and will be receiving messages directing us to the most convenient spaceport .   there s nothing to worry about .     are you sure .   said bliss .   you re bringing me down without papers and without any native world that these people here will recognize  and i m bound and determined not to mention gaia to them in any case .  so what do we do  if i m asked for my papers once we re on the surface .    trevize said   that s not likely to happen .  everyone will assume that was taken care of at the entry station .     but if they ask .     then  when that time comes  we   ll face the problem .  meanwhile  let s not manufacture problems out of air .     by the time we face the problems that may arise  it might well be too late to solve them .     i ll rely on my ingenuity to keep it from being too late .     talking about ingenuity  how did you get us through the entry station .    trevize looked at bliss  and let his lips slowly expand into a smile that made him seem like an impish teenager .   just brains .    pelorat said   what did you do  old man .    trevize said   it was a matter of appealing to him in the correct manner .  i d tried threats and subtle bribes .  i had appealed to his logic and his loyalty to the foundation .  nothing worked  so i fell back on the last resort .  i said that you were cheating on your wife  pelorat .     my wife .  hut  my dear fellow  i don t have a wife at the moment .     i know that  but he didn t .    bliss said   by  wife   i presume you mean a woman who is a particular man s regular companion .    trevize said   a little more than that  bliss .  a legal companion  one with enforceable rights in consequence of that companionship .    pelorat said nervously   bliss  i do not have a wife .  i have had one now and then in the past  but i haven t had one for quite a while .  if you would care to undergo the legal ritual     oh  pel   said bliss  making a sweeping away movement with her right hand   what would i care about that .  i have innumerable companions that are as close to me as your arm is close companion to your other arm .  it is only isolates who feel so alienated that they have to use artificial conventions to enforce a feeble substitute for true companionship .     but i am an isolate  bliss dear .     you will be less isolate in time  pel .  never truly gaia  perhaps  but less isolate  and you will have a flood of companions .     i only want you  bliss   said pel .    that s because you know nothing about it .  you ll learn .    trevize was concentrating on the viewscreen during that exchange with a look of strained tolerance on his face .  the cloud cover had come up close and  for a moment  all was gray fog .   microwave vision  he thought  and the computer switched at once to the detection of radar echoes .  the clouds disappeared and the surface of comporellon appeared in false color  the boundaries between sectors of different constitution a little fuzzy and wavering .    is that the way it s going to look from now on .   asked bliss  with some astonishment .    only till we drift below the clouds .  then it s back to sunlight .   even as he spoke  the sunshine and normal visibility returned .    i see   said bliss .  then  turning toward him   but what i don t see is why it should matter to that official at the entry station whether pel was deceiving his wife or not .     if that fellow  kendray  had held you back  the news  i said  might reach  terminus and  therefore  pelorat s wife .  pelorat would then be in trouble .  i  didn t specify the sort of trouble he would be in  but i tried to sound a   though it would be bad .   there is a kind of free masonry among males    trevize was grinning  now   and one male doesn t betray another fellow  male .  male .  he would even help  if requested .  the reasoning  i suppose  is that it  might be the helper s turn next to be helped .  i presume   he added  turning a  bit graver   that there is a similar free masonry among women  but  not being  a woman  i have never had an opportunity to observe it closely .    bliss s face resembled a pretty thundercloud .   is this a joke .   she demanded .    no  i m serious   said trevize .   i don t say that that kendray fellow let us through only to help janov avoid angering his wife .  the masculine free masonry may simply have added the last push to my other arguments .     but that is horrible .  it is its rules that hold society together and bind it into a whole .  is it such a light thing to disregard the rules for trivial reasons .     well   said trevize  in instant defensiveness   some of the rules are themselves trivial .  few worlds are very particular about passage in and out of their space in times of peace and commercial prosperity  such as we have now  thanks to the foundation .  comporellon  for some reason  is out of step probably because of an obscure matter of internal politics .  why should we suffer over that .     that is beside the point .  if we only obey those rules that we think are just and reasonable  then no rule will stand  for there is no rule that some will not think is unjust and unreasonable .  and if we wish to push our own individual advantage  as we see it  then we will always find reason to believe that soma hampering rule is unjust and unreasonable .  what starts  then  as a shrewd trick ends in anarchy and disaster  even for the shrewd trickster  since he  too  will not survive the collapse of society .    trevize said   society will not collapse that easily .  you speak as gaia  and gaia cannot possibly understand the association of free individuals .  rules  established with reason and justice  can easily outlive their usefulness as circumstances change  yet can remain in force through inertia .  it is then not only right  but useful  to break those rules as a way of advertising the fact that they have become useless or even actually harmful .     then every thief and murderer can argue he is serving humanity .     you go to extremes .  in the superorganism of gaia  there is automatic consensus on the rules of society and it occurs to no one to break them .  opt might as well say that gaia vegetates and fossilizes .  there is admittedly an element of disorder in free association  but that is the price one must pay fog the ability to induce novelty and change .   on the whole  it s a reasonable price .    bliss s voice rose a notch .   you are quite wrong if you think gaia vegetates and fossilizes .  our deeds  our ways  our views are under constant self examination .  they do not persist out of inertia  beyond reason .  gaia learns by experience and thought  and therefore changes when that is necessary .     even if what you say is so  the self examination and learning must be slow  because nothing but gaia exists on gaia .  here  in freedom  even when almost everyone agrees  there are bound to be a few who disagree and  in some cases  those few may be right  and if they are clever enough  enthusiastic enough  right enough  they will win out in the end and be heroes in future ages like hari seldon  who perfected psychohistory  pitted his own thoughts against the entire galactic empire  and won .     he has won only so far  trevize .  the second empire he planned for will not come to pass .  there will be galaxia instead .     will there .   said trevize grimly .    it was your decision  and  however much you argue with me in favor of isolates and of their freedom to be foolish and criminal  there is something in the hidden recesses of your mind that forced you to agree with me us gaia when you made your choice .     what is present in the hidden recesses of my mind   said trevize  more grimly still   is what i seek .   there  to begin with   he added  pointing to the viewscreen where a great city spread out to the horizon  a cluster of low structures climbing to occasional heights  surrounded by fields that were brown under a light frost .   pelorat shook his head .   too bad .  i meant to watch the approach  but i got caught up in listening to the argument .    trevize said   never mind  janov .  you can watch when we leave .  i ll promise to keep my mouth shut then  if you can persuade bliss to control her own .    and the far star descended a microwave beam to a landing at the spaceport .      .   kendray looked grave when he returned to the entry station and watched the far star pass through .  he was still clearly depressed at the close of his shift .   he was sitting down to his closing meal of the day when one of his mates  a gangling fellow with wide set eyes  thin light hair  and eyebrows so blond they seemed absent  sat down next to him .    what s wrong  ken .   said the other .   kendray s lips twisted .  he said   that was a gravitic ship that just passed through  gatis .     the odd looking one with zero radioactivity .     that s why it wasn t radioactive .  no fuel .  gravitic .    gatis nodded his head .   what we were told to watch for  right .     right .     and you got it .  leave it to you to be the lucky one .     not so lucky .  a woman without identification was on it and i didn t report her .     what .  look  don t tell me .  i don t want to know about it .  not another word .  you may be a pal  but i m not going to make myself an accomplice after the fact .     i m not worried about that .  not very much .  i had to send the ship down .  they want that gravitic   or any gravitic .  you know that .     sure  but you could at least have reported the woman .     didn t like to .  she s not married .  she was just picked up for for use .     how many men on board .     two .     and they just picked her up for for that .  they must be from terminus .    that s right .     they don t care what they do on terminus .     that s right .     disgusting .  and they get away with it .     one of them was married  and he didn t want his wife to know .  if i reported her  his wife would find out .     wouldn t she be back on terminus .     of course  but she d find out anyway .     serve the fellow right if his wife did find out .     i agree but i can t be the one to be responsible for it .     they ll hammer you for not reporting it .  not wanting to make trouble for a guy is no excuse .     would you have reported him .     i d have had to  i suppose .     no  you wouldn t .  the government wants that ship .  if i had insisted on putting the woman on report  the men on the ship would have changed their minds about landing and would have pulled away to some other planet .  the government wouldn t have wanted that .     but will they believe you .     i think so .   a very cute looking woman  too .  imagine a woman like that being willing to come along with two men  and married men with the nerve to take advantage .   you know  it s tempting .     i don t think you d want the missus to know you said that  or even thought that .    kendray said defiantly   who s going to tell her .  you .     come on .  you know better than that .   gatis s look of indignation faded quickly  and he said   it s not going to do those guys any good  you know  you letting them through .     i know .     the people down surface way will find out soon enough  and even if you get away with it  they won t .     i know   said kendray   but i m sorry for them .  whatever trouble the woman will make for them will be as nothing to what the ship will make for them .  the captain made a few remarks    kendray paused  and gatis said eagerly   like what .     never mind   said kendray .   if it comes out  it s my butt .     i m not going to repeat it .     neither am i .  but i m sorry for those two men from terminus .       .   to anyone who has been in space and experienced its changelessness  the real excitement of space flight comes when it is time to land on a new planet .  the ground speeds backward under you as you catch glimpses of land and water  of geometrical areas and lines that might represent fields and roads .  you become aware of the green of growing things  the gray of concrete  the brown of bare ground  the white of snow .  most of all  there is the excitement of populated conglomerates  cities which  on each world  have their own characteristic geometry and architectural variants .   in an ordinary ship  there would have been the excitement of touching down and skimming across a runway .  for the far star  it was different .  it floated through the air  was slowed by skillfully balancing air resistance and gravity  and finally made to come to rest above the spaceport .  the wind was gusty and that introduced an added complication .  the far star  when adjusted to low response to gravitational pull  was not only abnormally low in weight  but in mass as well .  if its mass were too close to zero  the wind would blow it away rapidly .  hence  gravitational response had to be raised and jetthrusts had to be delicately used not only against the planet s pull but against the wind s push  and in a manner that matched the shift in wind intensity closely .  without an adequate computer  it could not possibly have been done properly .   downward and downward  with small unavoidable shifts in this direction and that  drifted the ship until it finally sank into the outlined area that marked its assigned position in the port .   the sky was a pale blue  intermingled with flat white  when the far star landed .  the wind remained gusty even at ground level and though it was now no longer a navigational peril  it produced a chill that trevize winced at .  he realized at once that their clothing supply was totally unsuited to comporellian weather .   pelorat  on the other hand  looked about with appreciation and drew his breath deeply through his nose with relish  liking the bite of the cold  at least for the moment .  he even deliberately unseamed his coat in order to feel the wind against his chest .  in a little while  he knew  he would seam up again and adjust his scarf  but for now he wanted to feel the existence of an atmosphere .  one never did aboard ship .   bliss drew her coat closely about herself  and  with gloved hands  dragged her hat down to cover her ears .  her face was crumpled in misery and seemed close to tears .   she muttered   this world is evil .  it hates and mistreats us .     not at all  bliss dear   said pelorat earnestly .   i m sure the inhabitant  like this world  and that it uh likes them  if you want to put it that way .  we ll be indoors soon enough  and it will be warm there .    almost as an afterthought  he flipped one side of his coat outward curved it about her  while she snuggled against his shirtfront .   trevize did his best to ignore the temperature .  he obtained a map card from the port authority  checking it on his pocket computer to sure that it gave the necessary details his aisle and lot number  the and engine number of his ship  and so on .  he checked once more to sure that the ship was tightly secured  and then took out the maximum insurance allowed against the chance of misadventure  useless  actually  the far star should be invulnerable at the likely comporellian level of technology  and was entirely irreplaceable at whatever price  if it were not  .   .   trevize found the taxi station where it ought to be .   a number of facilities at spaceports were standardized in position  appearance  and manner of use .  they had to be  in view of the multiworld nature of the clientele .    he signaled for a taxi  punching out the destination merely as  city .    a taxi glided up to them on diamagnetic skis  drifting slightly under the impulse of the wind  and trembling under the vibration of its not quite silent engine .  it was a dark gray in color and bore its white taxi insignia on tell doors .  the taxi driver was wearing a dark coat and a white  furred bat .   pelorat  becoming aware  said softly   the planetary decor seem to be black and white .    trevize said   it may be more lively in the city proper .    the driver spoke into a small microphone  perhaps in order to avoid opening the window .   going to the city  folks .    there was a gentle singsong to his galactic dialect that was rather attractive  and he was not hard to understand always a relief on a new world   trevize said   that s right   and the rear door slid open .   bliss entered  followed by pelorat  and then by trevize .  the door wood and warm air welled upward .   bliss rubbed her hands and breathed a long sigh of relief .   the taxi pulled out slowly  and the driver said   that ship you came in is gravitic  isn t it .    trevize said dryly   considering the way it came down  would you doubt it .    the driver said   is it from terminus  then .    trevize said   do you know any other world that could build one .    the driver seemed to digest that as the taxi took on speed .  he then said   do you always answer a question with a question .    trevize couldn t resist .   why not .     in that case  how would you answer me if i asked if your name were golan trevize .     i would answer  what makes you ask .    the taxi came to a halt at the outskirts of the spaceport and the driver said   curiosity .  i ask again  are you golan trevize .    trevize s voice became stiff and hostile .   what business is that of yours .     my friend   said the driver   we re not moving till you answer the question .  and if you don t answer in a clear yes or no in about two seconds  i m turning the heat off in the passenger compartment and we ll keep on waiting .  are you golan trevize  councilman of terminus .  if your answer is in the negative  you will have to show me your identification papers .    trevize said   yes  i am golan trevize  and as a councilman of the foundation  i expect to be treated with all the courtesy due my rank .  your failure to do so will have you in hot water  fellow .  now what .     now we can proceed a little more lightheartedly .   the taxi began to move again .   i choose my passengers carefully  and i had expected to pick up two men only .  the woman was a surprise and i might have made a mistake .  as it is  if i have you  then i can leave it to you to explain the woman when you reach your destination .     you don t know my destination .     as it happens  i do .  you re going to the department of transportation .     that s not where i want to go .     that matters not one little bit  councilman .  if i were a taxi driver  i d take you where you want to go .  since i m not  i take you where i want you to go .       pardon me   said pelorat  leaning forward   you certainly seem to be a taxi driver .  you re driving a taxi .     anyone might drive a taxi .  not everyone has a license to do so .  and not every car that looks like a taxi is a taxi .    trevize said   let s stop playing games .  who are you and what are you doing .  remember that you ll have to account for this to the foundation .     not i   said the driver   my superiors  perhaps .  i m an agent of the comporellian security force .  i am under orders to treat you with all due respect to your rank  but you must go where i take you .  and be very careful how you react  for this vehicle is armed  and i am under orders to defend myself against attack .       .   the vehicle  having reached cruising speed  moved with absolute  smooth quiet  and trevize sat there in quietness as frozen .  he was aware  without actually looking  of pelorat glancing at him now and then with a look of uncertainty on his face  a  what do we do now .  please tell me  look .   bliss  a quick glance told him  sat calmly  apparently unconcerned .  of course  she was a whole world in herself .  all of gaia  though it might be at galactic distances  was wrapped up in her skin .  she had resources that could be called on in a true emergency .   but  then  what had happened .   clearly  the official at the entry station  following routine  had sent down his report omitting bliss and it had attracted the interest of the security people and  of all things  the department of transportation .  why .   it was peacetime and he knew of no specific tensions between comporellon and the foundation .  he himself was an important foundation official   wait  he had told the official at the entry station kendray  his name had been that he was on important business with the comporellian government .  he had stressed that in his attempt to get through .  kendray must have reported that as well and that would rouse all sorts of interest .   he hadn t anticipated that  and he certainly should have .   what  then  about his supposed gift of rightness .  was he beginning to believe that he was the black box that gaia thought he was or said it thought he was .  was he being led into a quagmire by the growth of an overconfidence built on superstition .   how could he for one moment be trapped in that folly .  had he never in hit life been wrong .  did he know what the weather would be tomorrow .  did he win large amounts in games of chance .  the answers were no  no  and no .   well  then  was it only in the large  inchoate things that he was a ways right .  how could he tell .   forget that .   after all  the mere fact that he had stated he had important state business no  it was  foundation security  that he had said   well  then  the mere fact that he was there on a matter of foundation security  coming  as he had  secretly and unheralded  would surely attract their attention .   yes  but until they knew what it was all about they would surely act with the utmost circumspection .  they would be ceremonious and treat him as a high dignitary .  they would not kidnap him and make use of threats .   yet that was exactly what they had done .  why .   what made them feel strong enough and powerful enough to treat a councilman of terminus in such a fashion .   could it be earth .  was the same force that hid the world of origin so effectively  even against the great mentalists of the second foundation  now working to circumvent his search for earth in the very first stage of that search .  was earth omniscient .  omipotent .   trevize shook his head .  that way lay paranoia .  was he going to blame earth for everything .  was every quirk of behavior  every bend in the road  every twist of circumstance  to be the result of the secret machinations of earth .  as soon as he began to think in that fashion  he was defeated .   at that point  he felt the vehicle decelerating and was brought back to reality at a stroke .   it occurred to him that he had never  even for one moment  looked at the city through which they had been passing .  he looked about now  a touch wildly .  the buildings were low  but it was a cold planet most of the structures were probably underground .   he saw no trace of color and that seemed against human nature .   occasionally  he could see a person pass  well bundled .  but  then  the people  like the buildings themselves  were probably mostly underground .   the taxi had stopped before a low  broad building  set in a depression  the bottom of which trevize could not see .  some moments passed and it continued to remain there  the driver himself motionless as well .  his tall  white hat nearly touched the roof of the vehicle .   trevize wondered fleetingly how the driver managed to step in and out of the vehicle without knocking his hat off  then said  with the controlled anger one would expect of a haughty and mistreated official   well  driver  what now .    the comporellian version of the glittering field partition that separated the driver from the passengers was not at all primitive .  sound waves could pass through though trevize was quite certain that material objects  at reasonable energies  could not .   the driver said   someone will be up to get you .  just sit back and take it easy .    even as he said this  three heads appeared in a slow  smooth ascent from the depression in which the building rested .  after that  there came the rest of the bodies .  clearly  the newcomers were moving up the equivalent of an escalator  but trevize could not see the details of the device from where he sat .   as the three approached  the passenger door of the taxi opened and a flood of cold air swept inward .   trevize stepped out  seaming his coat to the neck .  the other two followed him bliss with considerable reluctance .   the three comporellians were shapeless  wearing garments that ballooned outward and were probably electrically heated .  trevize felt scorn at that .  there was little use for such things on terminus  and the one time he had borrowed a heat coat during winter on the nearby planet of anacreon  he discovered it had a tendency to grow warmer at a slow rate so that by the time he realized he was too warm he was perspiring uncomfortably .   as the comporellians approached  trevize noted with a distinct sense of indignation that they were armed .  nor did they try to conceal the fact .  quite the contrary .  each had a blaster in a holster attached to the outer garment  one of the comporellians  having stepped up to confront trevize  said gruffly   your pardon  councilman   and then pulled his coat open with rough movement .  he had inserted questing hands which moved quickly up and down trevize s sides  back  chest  and thighs .  the coat was shaken and felt .  trevize was too overcome by confused astonishment to realize he had been rapidly and efficiently searched till it was over .   pelorat  his chin drawn down and his mouth in a twisted grimace  was undergoing a similar indignity at the hands of a second comporellian .   the third was approaching bliss  who did not wait to be touched .  she  at least  knew what to expect  somehow  for she whipped off her coat and  for a moment  stood there in her light clothing  exposed to the whistle of the wind .   she said  freezingly enough to match the temperature   you can see i m not armed .    and indeed anyone could .  the comporellian shook the coat  as though by its weight he could tell if it contained a weapon perhaps he could  and retreated .   bliss put on her coat again  huddling into it   and for a moment trevize admired her gesture .  he knew how she felt about the cold  but she had not allowed a tremor or shiver to escape her as she had stood there in thin blouse and slacks .   then he wondered if  in the emergency  she might not have drawn warmth from the rest of gaia .    one of the comporellians gestured  and the three outworlders followed him .  the other two comporellians fell behind .  the one or two pedestrians who were on the street did not bother to watch what was happening .  either they were too accustomed to the sight or  more likely  had their minds occupied with getting to some indoor destination as soon as possible .   trevize saw now that it was a moving ramp up which the comporellians had ascended .  they were descending now  all six of them  and pasted through a lock arrangement almost as complicated as that on a spaceship to keep heat inside  no doubt  rather than air .   and then  at once  they were inside a huge building .     chapter      struggle for the ship       .     trevize s first impression was that he was on the set of a hyperdrama specifically  that of a historical romance of imperial days .  there was a particular set  with few variations  perhaps only one existed and was used by every hyperdrama producer  for all he knew   that represented the great worldgirdling planet city of trantor in its prime .   there were the large spaces  the busy scurry of pedestrians  the small vehicles speeding along the lanes reserved for them .   trevize looked up  almost expecting to see air taxis climbing into dim vaulted recesses  but that at least was absent .  in fact  as his initial astonishment subsided  it was clear that the building was far smaller than one would expect on trantor .  it was only a building and not part of a complex that stretched unbroken for thousands of miles in every direction .   the colors were different  too .  on the hyperdramas  trantor was always depicted as impossibly garish in coloring and the clothing was  if taken literally  thoroughly impractical and unserviceable .  however  all those colors and frills were meant to serve a symbolic purpose for they indicated the decadence  a view that was obligatory  these days  of the empire  and of trantor particularly .   if that were so  however  comporellon was the very reverse of decadent  for the color scheme that pelorat had remarked upon at the spaceport was here borne out .   the walls were in shades of gray  the ceilings white  the clothing of the population in black  gray  and white .  occasionally  there was an all black costume  even more occasionally  an all gray  never an all white that trevize could see .  the pattern was always different  however  as though people  deprived of color  still managed  irrepressibly  to find ways of asserting individuality .   faces tended to be expressionless or  if not that  then grim .  women wore their hair short  men longer  but pulled backward into short queues .  no one looked at anyone else as he or she passed .  everyone seemed to breathe a purposefulness  as though there was definite business on each mind and room for nothing else .  men and women dressed alike  with only length of hair and the slight bulge of breast and width of hip marking the difference .   the three were guided into an elevator that went down five levels .  there they emerged and were moved on to a door on which there appeared in small and unobtrusive lettering  white on gray   mitza lizalor  mintrans .    the comporellian in the lead touched the lettering  which  after a moment  glowed in response .  the door opened and they walked in .   it was a large room and rather empty  the bareness of content serving  perhaps  as a kind of conspicuous consumption of space designed to show the power of the occupant .   two guards stood against the far wall  faces expressionless and eyes firmly fixed on those entering .  a large desk filled the center of the room  set perhaps just a little back of center .  behind the desk was  presumably  mitza lizalor  large of body  smooth of face  dark of eyes .  two strong and capable hands with long  square ended fingers rested on the desk .   the mintrans  minister of transportation  trevize assumed  had the lapels of the outer garment a broad and dazzling white against the dark gray of the rest of the costume .  the double bar of white extended diagonally below the lapels  across the garment itself and crossing at the center of the chest .  trevize could see that although the garment was cut in such a fashion as to obscure the swelling of a woman s breasts on either side  the white x called attention to them .   the minister was undoubtedly a woman .  even if her breasts were ignored  her short hair showed it  and though there was no makeup on her face  her features showed it  too .   her voice  too  was indisputably feminine  a rich contralto .   she said   good afternoon .  it is not often that we are honored by a visit of men from terminus .   and of an unreported woman as well .   her eyes passed from one to another  then settled on trevize  who was standing stiffly and frowningly erect .   and one of the men a member of the council  too .     a councilman of the foundation   said trevize  trying to make his voice ring .   councilman golan trevize on a mission from the foundation .     on a mission .   the minister s eyebrows rose .    on a mission   repeated trevize .   why  then  are we being treated as felons .  why have we been taken into custody by armed guards and brought here as prisoners .  the council of the foundation  i hope you understand  will not be pleased to hear of this .     and in any case   said bliss  her voice seeming a touch shrill in comparison with that of the older woman   are we to remain standing indefinitely .    the minister gazed coolly at bliss for a long moment  then raised an arm and said   three chairs .  now .    a door opened and three men  dressed in the usual somber comporellian fashion  brought in three chairs at a semitrot .  the three people standing before the desk sat down .    there   said the minister  with a wintry smile   are we comfortable .    trevize thought not .  the chairs were uncushioned  cold to the touch  flat of surface and back  making no compromise with the shape of the body .  he said   why are we here .    the minister consulted papers lying on her desk .   i will explain as soon as i am certain of my facts .  your ship is the far star out of terminus .  is that correct  councilman .     it is .    the minister looked up .   i used your title  councilman .  will you  as a courtesy  use mine .     would madam minister be sufficient .  or is there an honorific .     no honorific  sir  and you need not double your words .   minister  is sufficient  or  madam  if you weary of repetition .     then my answer to your question is  it is  minister .     the captain of the ship is golan trevize  citizen of the foundation and member of the council on terminus a freshman councilman  actually .  and you are trevize .  am i correct in all this  councilman .     you are  minister .  and since i am a citizen of the foundation     i am not yet done  councilman .  save your objections till i am .  accompanying you is janov pelorat  scholar  historian  and citizen of the foundation .  and that is you  is it not  dr .  pelorat .    pelorat could not suppress a slight start as the minister turned her keen glance on him .  he said   yes  it is  my d   he paused  and began again   yes  it is  minister .    the minister clasped her hands stiffly .   there is no mention in the report that has been forwarded to me of a woman .  is this woman a member of the ship s complement .     she is  minister   said trevize .    then i address myself to the woman .  your name .     i am known as bliss   said bliss  sitting erectly and speaking with calm clarity   though my full name is longer  madam .  do you wish it all .     i will be content with bliss for the moment .  are you a citizen of the foundation  bliss .     i am not  madam .     of what world are you a citizen  bliss .     i have no documents attesting to citizenship with respect to any world  madam .     no papers  bliss .   she made a small mark on the papers before her .   that fact is noted .  what is it you are doing on board the ship .     i am a passenger  madam .     did either councilman trevize or dr .  pelorat ask to see your papers before you boarded  bliss .     no  madam .     did you inform them that you were without papers  bliss .     no  madam .     what is your function on board ship  bliss .  does your name suit your function .    bliss said proudly   i am a passenger and have no other function .    trevize broke in .   why are you badgering this woman  minister .  what law has she broken .    minister lizalor s eyes shifted from bliss to trevize .  she said   you are an outworlder  councilman  and do not know our laws .  nevertheless  you are subject to them if you choose to visit our world .  you do not bring your laws with you  that is a general rule of galactic law  i believe .     granted  minister  but that doesn t tell me which of your laws she has broken .     it is a general rule in the galaxy  councilman  that a visitor from a world outside the dominions of the world she is visiting have her identification papers with her .  many worlds are lax in this respect  valuing tourism  or indifferent to the rule of order .  we of comporellon are not .  we are a world o   law and rigid in its application .  she is a worldless person  and as such  breaks our law .    trevize said   she had no choice in the matter .  i was piloting the ship  and i brought it down to comporellon .  she had to accompany us  minister  or do you suggest she should have asked to be jettisoned in space .     this merely means that you  too  have broken our law  councilman .     no  that is not so  minister .  i am not an outworlder .  i am a citizen of the foundation  and comporellon and the worlds subject to it are an associated power of the foundation .  as a citizen of the foundation  i can travel freely here .     certainly  councilman  as long as you have documentation to prove that you are indeed a citizen of the foundation .     which i do  minister .     yet even as citizen of the foundation  you do not have the right to break our law by bringing a worldless person with you .    trevize hesitated .  clearly  the border guard  kendray  had not kept faith with him  so there was no point in protecting him .  he said   we were not stopped at the immigration station and i considered that implicit permission to bring this woman with me  minister .     it is true you were not stopped  councilman .  it is true the woman war not reported by the immigration authorities and was passed through .  i can suspect  however  that the officials at the entry station decided and quite correctly that it was more important to get your ship to the surface than to worry about a worldless person .  what they did was  strictly speaking  an infraction of the rules  and the matter will have to be dealt with in the proper fashion  but i have no doubt that the decision will be that the infraction was justified .  we are a world of rigid law  councilman  but we are not rigid beyond the dictates of reason .    trevize said at once   then i call upon reason to bend your rigor now  minister .  if  indeed  you received no information from the immigration station to the effect that a worldless person was on board ship  then you had no knowledge that we were breaking any law at the time we landed .  yet it is quite apparent that you were prepared to take us into custody the moment we landed  and you did  in fact  do so .  why did you do so  when you had no reason to think any law was being broken .    the minister smiled .   i understand your confusion  councilman .  please let me assure you that whatever knowledge we had gained or had not gained as to the worldless condition of your passenger had nothing to do with your being taken into custody .  we are acting on behalf of the foundation  of which  as you point out  we are an associated power .    trevize stared at her .   but that s impossible  minister .  it s even worse .  it s ridiculous .    the minister s chuckle was like the smooth flow of honey .  she said   i am interested in the way you consider it worse to be ridiculous than impossible  councilman .  i agree with you there .  unfortunately for you  however  it is neither .  why should it be .     because i am an official of the foundation government  on a mission for them  and it is absolutely inconceivable that they would wish to arrest me  or that they would even have the power to do so  since i have legislative immunity .     ah  you omit my title  but you are deeply moved and that is perhaps forgivable .  still  i am not asked to arrest you directly .  i do so only that i may carry out what i am asked to do  councilman .     which is  minister .   said trevize  trying to keep his emotion under control in the face of this formidable woman .    which is to commandeer your ship  councilman  and return it to the foundation .     what .     again you omit my title  councilman .  that is very slipshod of you and no way to press your own case .  the ship is not yours  i presume .  was it designed by you  or built by you  or paid for by you .     of course not  minister .  it was assigned to me by the foundation government .     then  presumably  the foundation government has the right to cancel that assignment  councilman .  it is a valuable ship  i imagine .    trevize did not answer .   the minister said   it is a gravitic ship  councilman .  there cannot be many and even the foundation must have but a very few .  they must regret having assigned one of those very few to you .  perhaps you can persuade them  .    to assign you another and less valuable ship that will nevertheless amply  suffice for your mission .   but we must have the ship in which you have arrived .     no  minister  i cannot give up the ship .  i cannot believe the foundation asks it of you .    the minister smiled .   not of me solely  councilman .  not of comporellon  specifically .  we have reason to believe that the request was sent out to ever  one of the many worlds and regions under foundation jurisdiction or association .  from this  i deduce that the foundation does not know your itinerary and is seeking you with a certain angry vigor .  from which i further deduce that you have no mission to deal with comporellon on behalf of the foundation  since in that case they would know where you were and deal with us specifically .  in short  councilman  you have been lying to me .    trevize said  with a certain difficulty   i would like to see a copy of request you have received from the foundation government  minister .  i entitled  i think  to that .     certainly  if all this comes to legal action .  we take our legal forms very seriously  councilman  and your rights will be fully protected  i assure you .  it would be better and easier  however  if we come to an agreement here without the publicity and delay of legal action .  we would prefer that  and  i am certain  so would the foundation  which cannot wish the galaxy at large to know of a runaway legislator .  that would put the foundation in a ridiculous light  and  by your estimate and mine  that would be worse than impossible .    trevize was again silent .   the minister waited a moment  then went on  as imperturbable as ever .   come  councilman  either way  by informal agreement or by legal action  we intend to have the ship .  the penalty for bringing in a worldless passenger will depend on which route we take .  demand the law and she will represent an additional point against you and you will all suffer the full punishment for the crime  and that will not be light  i assure you .  come to an agreement  and your passenger can be sent away by commercial flight to any destination she wishes  and  for that matter  you tvvo can accompany her  if you wish .  or  if the foundation is willing  we can supply you with one of our own ships  a perfectly adequate one  provided  of course  that the foundation will replace it with an equivalent ship of their own .  or  if  for any reason  you do not wish to return to foundation controlled territory  we might be willing to offer you refuge here and  perhaps  eventual comporellian citizenship .  you see  you have many possibilities of gain if you come to a friendly arrangement  but none at all if you insist on your legal rights .    trevize said   minister  you are too eager .  you promise what you cannot do .  you cannot offer me refuge in the face of a foundation request that i be delivered to them .    the minister said   councilman  i never promise what i cannot do .  the foundation s request is only for the ship .  they make no request concerning you as an individual  or for anyone else on the ship .  their sole request is for the vessel .    trevize glanced quickly at bliss  and said   may i have your permission  minister  to consult with dr .  pelorat and miss bliss for a short while .     certainly  councilman .  you may have fifteen minutes .     privately  minister .     you will be led to a room and  after fifteen minutes  you will be led back  councilman .  you will not be interfered with while you are there nor will we attempt to monitor your conversation .  you have my word on that and i keep my word .  however  you will be adequately guarded so do not be so foolish as to think of escaping .     we understand  minister .     and when you come back  we will expect your free agreement to give up the ship .  otherwise  the law will take its course  and it will be much the worse for all of you  councilman .  is that understood .     that is understood  minister   said trevize  keeping his rage under tight control  since its expression would do him no good at all .      .   it was a small room  but it was well lighted .  it contained a couch and two chairs  and one could hear the soft sound of a ventilating fan .  on the whole  it was clearly more comfortable than the minister s large and sterile office .   a guard had led them there  grave and tall  his hand hovering near the butt of his blaster .  he remained outside the door as they entered and said  in a heavy voice   you have fifteen minutes .    he had no sooner said that than the door slid shut  with a thud .   trevize said   i can only hope that we can t be overheard .    pelorat said   she did give us her word  golan .     you judge others by yourself  janov .  her so called  word  will not suffice .  she will break it without hesitation if she wants to .     it doesn t matter   said bliss .   i can shield this place .     you have a shielding device .   asked pelorat .   bliss smiled  with a sudden flash of white teeth .   gaia s mind is a shielding device  pel .  it s an enormous mind .     we are here   said trevize angrily   because of the limitations of that enormous mind .     what do you mean .   said bliss .    when the triple confrontation broke up  you withdrew me from the minds of both the mayor and that second foundationer  gendibal .  neither was to think of me again  except distantly and indifferently .  i was to be left to myself .     we had to do that   said bliss .   you are our most important resource .       yes .  golan trevize  the ever right .  but you did not withdraw my ship from their minds  did you .  mayor branno did not ask for me  she had no interest in me  but she did ask for the ship .  she has not forgotten the ship .    bliss frowned .   trevize said   think about it .  gaia casually assumed that i included my ship  that we were a unit .  if branno didn t think of me  she wouldn t think of the ship .  the trouble is that gaia doesn t understand individuality .  it thought of the ship and me as a single organism  and it was wrong to think that .    bliss said softly   that is possible .     well  then   said trevize flatly   it s up to you to rectify that mistake .  i must have my gravitic ship and my computer .  nothing else will do .  therefore  bliss  make sure that i keep the ship .  you can control minds .     yes  trevize  but we do not exercise that control lightly .  we did it in connection with the triple confrontation  but do you know how long that confrontation was planned .  calculated .  weighed .  it took literally many years .  i cannot simply walk up to a woman and adjust the mind to suit someone s convenience .     is this a time    bliss went on forcefully .   if i began to follow such a course of action  where do we stop .  i might have influenced the agent s mind at the entry station and we would have passed through at once .  i might have influenced the agent s mind in the vehicle  and he would have let us go .     well  since you mention it  why didn t you do these things .     because we don t know where it would lead .  we don t know the side effects  which may well turn out to make the situation worse .  if i adjust the minister s mind now  that will affect her dealings with others with whom she will come in contact and  since she is a high official in her government  it may affect interstellar relations .  until such time as the matter is thoroughly worked out  we dare not touch her mind .     then why are you with us .     because the time may come when your life is threatened .  i must protect your life at all costs  even at the cost of my pel or of myself .  your life was not threatened at the entry station .  it is not threatened now .  you must work this out for yourself  and do so at least until gaia can estimate the consequence of some sort of action and take it .    trevize fell into a period of thought .  then he said   in that case  i have to try something .  it may not work .    the door moved open  thwacking into its socket as noisily as it had closed .   the guard said   come out .    as they emerged  pelorat whispered   what are you going to do  golan .    trevize shook his head and whispered   i m not entirely sure .  i will have to improvise .       .   minister lizalor was still at her desk when they returned to her office .  her face broke into a grim smile as they walked in .   she said   i trust  councilman trevize  that you have returned to tell me that you are giving up this foundation ship you have .     i have come  minister   said trevize calmly   to discuss terms .     there are no terms to discuss  councilman .  a trial  if you insist on one  can be arranged very quickly and would be carried through even more quickly .  i guarantee your conviction even in a perfectly fair trial since your guilt in bringing in a worldless person is obvious and indisputable .  after that  we will be legally justified in seizing the ship and you three would suffer heavy penalties .  don t force those penalties on yourself just to delay us for a day .     nevertheless  there are terms to discuss  minister  because no matter how quickly you convict us  you cannot seize the ship without my consent .  any attempt you make to force your way into the ship without me will destroy it  and the spaceport with it  and every human being in the spaceport .  this will surely infuriate the foundation  something you dare not do .  threatening us or mistreating us in order to force me to open the ship is surely against your law  and if you break your own law in desperation and subject us to torture or even to a period of cruel and unusual imprisonment  the foundation will find out about it and they will be even more furious .  however much they want the ship they cannot allow a precedent that would permit the mistreatment of foundation citizens .   shall we talk terms .     this is all nonsense   said the minister  scowling .   if necessary  we will call in the foundation itself .  they will know how to open their own ship  or they will force you to open it .    trevize said   you do not use my title  minister  but you are emotionally moved  so that is perhaps forgivable .  you know that the very last thing you will do is call in the foundation  since you have no intention of delivering the ship to them .    the smile faded from the minister s face .   what nonsense is this  councilman .     the kind of nonsense  minister  that others  perhaps  ought not to hear .  let my friend and the young woman go to some comfortable hotel room and obtain the rest they need so badly and let your guards leave  too .  they can remain just outside and you can have them leave you a blaster .  you are not a small woman and  with a blaster  you have nothing to fear from me .  i am unarmed .    the minister leaned toward him across the desk .   i have nothing to fear from you in any case .    without looking behind her  she beckoned to one of the guards  who approached at once and came to a halt at her side with a stamp of his feet .  said   guard  take that one and that one to suite   .  they are to stay there and to be made comfortable and to be well guarded .  you will be held responsible for any mistreatment they may receive  as well as for any breach of security .    she stood up  and not all of trevize s determination to maintain an absolute composure sufficed to keep him from flinching a little .  she was tall  a  .  tall  at least  as trevize s own   .    meters  perhaps a centimeter or so taller .  she had a narrow waistline  with the two white strips across her chest continuing into an encirclement of her waist  making it look even narrower  there was a massive grace about her and trevize thought ruefully that her statement that she had nothing to fear from him might well be correct .  in a rough and tumble  he thought  she would have no trouble pinning his shoulders to the mat .   she said   come with me  councilman .  if you are going to talk nonsense then  for your own sake  the fewer who hear you  the better .    she led the way in a brisk stride  and trevize followed   feeling shrunken in her massive shadow  a feeling he had never before had with a woman .   they entered an elevator and  as the door closed behind them  she said   we are alone now and if you are under the illusion  councilman  that you can use force with me in order to accomplish some imagined purpose  please forget that .   the singsong in her voice grew more pronounced as she said  with clear amusement   you look like a reasonably strong specimen  but i assure you i will have no trouble in breaking your arm or your back  if i must .  i am armed  but i will not have to use any weapon .    trevize scratched at his cheek as his eyes drifted first down  then up her body .   minister  i can hold my own in a wrestling match with any man my weight  but i have already decided to forfeit a bout with you .  i know when i am outclassed .     good   said the minister  and looked pleased .   trevize said   where are we going  minister .     down .  quite far down .  don t be upset  however .  in the hyperdramas  this would be a preliminary to taking you to a dungeon  i suppose  but we have no dungeons on comporellon only reasonable prisons .  we are going to my private apartment  not as romantic as a dungeon in the bad old imperial days  but more comfortable .    trevize estimated that they were at least fifty meters below the surface of the planet  when the elevator door slid to one side and they stepped out .      .   trevize looked about the apartment with clear surprise .   the minister said grimly   do you disapprove of my living quarters  councilman .     no  i have no reason to  minister .  i am merely surprised .  i find it unexpected .  the impression i had of your world from what little i saw and heard since arriving was that it was an an abstemious one  eschewing useless luxury .     so it is  councilman .  our resources are limited  and our life must be as harsh as our climate .     but this  minister   and trevize held out both hands as though to embrace the room where  for the first time on this world  he saw color  where the couches were well cushioned  where the light from the illuminated walls was soft  and where the floor was force carpeted so that steps were springy and silent .   this is surely luxury .     we eschew  as you say  councilman  useless luxury  ostentatious luxury  wastefully excessive luxury .  this  however  is private luxury  which has its use .  i work hard and bear much responsibility .  i need a place where i can forget  for a while  the difficulties of my post .    trevize said   and do all comporellians live like this when the eyes of others are averted  minister .     it depends on the degree of work and responsibility .  few can afford to  or deserve to  or  thanks to our code of ethics  want to .     but you  minister  can afford to  deserve to and want to .    the minister said   rank has its privileges as well as its duties .  and now sit down  councilman  and tell me of this madness of yours .   she sat down on the couch  which gave slowly under her solid weight  and pointed to an equally soft chair in which trevize would be facing her at not too great a distance .    trevize sat down .   madness  minister .    the minister relaxed visibly  leaning her right elbow on a pillow .   in private conversation  we need not observe the rules of formal discourse too punctiliously .  you may call me lizalor .  i will call you  trevize .   tell me what is on your mind  trevize  and let us inspect it .    trevize crossed his legs and sat back in his chair .   see here  lizalor  you gave me the choice of either agreeing to give up the ship voluntarily  or of being subjected to a formal trial .  in both cases  you would end up with the ship .   yet you have been going out of your way to persuade me to adopt the former alternative .  you are willing to offer me another ship to replace mine  so that my friends and i might go anywhere we chose .  we might even stay here on comporellon and qualify for citizenship  if we chose .  in smaller things  you were willing to allow me fifteen minutes to consult with my friends .  you were even willing to bring me here to your private apartment  while my friends are now  presumably  in comfortable quarters .  in short  you are bribing me  lizalor  rather desperately  to grant you the ship without the necessity of a trial .     come  trevize  are you in no mood to give me credit for humane impulses .     none .     or the thought that voluntary surrender would be quicker and more convenient than a trial would be .     no .  i would offer a different suggestion .     which is .     a trial has one thing in its strong disfavor  it is a public affair .  you have several times referred to this world s rigorous legal system  and i suspect it would be difficult to arrange a trial without its being fully recorded .  if were so  the foundation would know of it and you would have to hand the ship to it once the trial was over .     of course   said lizalor  without expression .   it is the foundation owns the ship .     but   said trevize   a private agreement with me would not have to be placed on formal record .  you could have the ship and  since the foundation would not know of the matter they don t even know that we are on this world comporellon could keep the ship .  that  i am sure  is what you intend to do .     why should we do that .   she was still without expression .   are we not part of the foundation confederation .     not quite .  your status is that of an associated power .  in any map on which the member worlds of the federation are shown in red  comporellon and its dependent worlds would show up as a patch of pale pink .     even so  as an associated power  we would surely co operate with the foundation .     would you .  might not comporellon be dreaming of total independence  even leadership .  you are an old world .  almost all worlds claim to be o der than they are  but comporellon is an old world .    minister lizalor allowed a cold smile to cross her face .   the oldest  if some of our enthusiasts are to be believed .     might there not have been a time when comporellon was indeed the leading world of a relatively small group of worlds .  might you not still dream of recovering that lost position of power .     do you think we dream of so impossible a goal .  i called it madness before i knew your thoughts  and it is certainly madness now that i do .     dreams may be impossible  yet still be dreamed .  terminus  located at the very edge of the galaxy and with a five century history that is briefer than that of any other world  virtually rules the galaxy .  and shall comporellon not .  eh .   trevize was smiling .   lizalor remained grave .   terminus reached that position  we are given to understand  by the working out of hari seldon s plan .     that is the psychological buttress of its superiority and it will hold only as long  perhaps  as people believe it .  it may be that the comporellian government does not believe it .  even so  terminus also enjoys a technological buttress .  terminus s hegemony over the galaxy undoubtedly rests on its advanced technology of which the gravitic ship you are so anxious to have is an example .  no other world but terminus disposes of gravitic ships .  if comporellon could have one  and could learn its workings in detail  it would be bound to have taken a giant technological step forward .  i don t think it would be sufficient to help you overcome terminus s lead  but your government might think so .    lizalor said   you can t be serious in this .  any government that kept the ship in the face of the foundation s desire to have it would surely experience the foundation s wrath  and history shows that the foundation can be quite uncomfortably wrathful .    trevize said   the foundation s wrath would only be exerted if the foundation knew there was something to be wrathful about .     in that case  trevize if we assume your analysis of the situation is something other than mad would it not be to your benefit to give us the ship and drive a hard bargain .  we would pay well for the chance of having it quietly  according to your line of argument .     could you then rely on my not reporting the matter to the foundation .     certainly .  since you would have to report your own part in it .     i could report having acted under duress .     yes .  unless your good sense told you that your mayor would never believe that .   come  make a deal .    trevize shook his head .   i will not  madam lizalor .  the ship is mine and it must stay mine .  as i have told you  it will blow up with extraordinary power if you attempt to force an entry .  i assure you i am telling you the truth .  don t rely on its being a bluff .     you could open it  and reinstruct the computer .     undoubtedly  but i won t do that .    lizalor drew a heavy sigh .   you know we could make you change your mind if not by what we could do to you  then by what we could do to your friend  dr .  pelorat  or to the young woman .     torture  minister .  is that your law .     no  councilman .  but we might not have to do anything so crude .  there is always the psychic probe .    for the first time since entering the minister s apartment  trevize felt an inner chill .    you can t do that either .  the use of the psychic probe for anything but medical purposes is outlawed throughout the galaxy .     but if we are driven to desperation     i am willing to chance that   said trevize calmly   for it would do you no good .  my determination to retain my ship is so deep that the psychic probe would destroy my mind before it twisted it into giving it to you .    that was a bluff  he thought  and the chill inside him deepened .    and even if you were so skillful as to persuade me without destroying my mind and if i were to open the ship and disarm it and hand it over to you  it would still do you no good .  the ship s computer is even more advanced than the ship is  and it is designed somehow i don t know how to work at its full potential only with me .  it is what i might call a one person computer .     suppose  then  you retained your ship  and remained its pilot .  would you consider piloting it for us as an honored comporellian citizen .  a large salary .  considerable luxury .  your friends  too .     no .     what is it you suggest .  that we simply let you and your friends launch your ship and go off into the galaxy .  i warn you that before we allow you to do this  we might simply inform the foundation that you are here with your ship  and leave all to them .     and lose the ship yourself .     if we must lose it  perhaps we would rather lose it to the foundation than to an impudent outworlder .     then let me suggest a compromise of my own .     a compromise .  well  i will listen .  proceed .    trevize said carefully   i am on an important mission .  it began with foundation support .  that support seems to have been suspended  but the mission remains important .  let me have comporellian support instead and if i complete the mission successfully  comporellon will benefit .      lizalor wore a dubious expression .   and you will not return the ship to the foundation .     i have never planned to do that .  the foundation would not be searching for the ship so desperately if they thought there was any intention of my casually returning it to them .     that is not quite the same thing as saying that you will give the ship to us .     once i have completed the mission  the ship may be of no further use to me .  in that case  i would not object to comporellon having it .    the two looked at each other in silence for a few moments .   lizalor said   you use the conditional .  the ship  may be .   that is of no value to us .     i could make wild promises  but of what value would that be to you .  the fact that my promises are cautious and limited should show you that they are at least sincere .     clever   said lizalor  nodding .   i like that .  well  what is your mission and how might it benefit comporellon .    trevize said   no  no  it is your turn .  will you support me if i show you that the mission is of importance to comporellon .    minister lizalor rose from the couch  a tall  overpowering presence .   i am hungry  councilman trevize  and i will get no further on an empty stomach .  i will offer you something to eat and drink in moderation .  after that  we will finish the matter .    and it seemed to trevize that there was a rather carnivorous look of anticipation about her at that moment  so that he tightened his lips with just a bit of unease .      .   the meal might have been a nourishing one  but it was not one to delight the palate .  the main course consisted of boiled beef in a mustardy sauce  resting on a foundation of a leafy vegetable trevize did not recognize .  nor did he like it for it had a bitter salty taste he did not enjoy .  he found out later it was a form of seaweed .   there was  afterward  a piece of fruit that tasted something like an apple tainted by peach  not bad  actually  and a hot  dark beverage that was bitter enough for trevize to leave half behind and ask if he might have some cold water instead .  the portions were all small  but  under the circumstances  trevize did not mind .   the meal had been private  with no servants in view .  the minister had herself heated and served the food  and herself cleared away the dishes and cutlery .    i hope you found the meal pleasant   said lizalor  as they left the dining room .    quite pleasant   said trevize  without enthusiasm .   the minister again took her seat on the couch .   let us return then   she said   to our earlier discussion .  you had mentioned that comporellon might resent the foundation s lead in technology and its overlordship of the galaxy .  in a way that s true  but that aspect of the situation would interest only those who are interested in interstellar politics  and they are comparatively few .  what is much more to the point is that the average comporellian is horrified at the immorality of the foundation .  there is immorality in most worlds  but it seems most marked in terminus .  i would say that any anti terminus animus that exists on this world is rooted in that  rather than in more abstract matters .     immorality .   said trevize  puzzled .   whatever the faults of the foundation you have to admit it runs its part of the galaxy with reasonable efficiency and fiscal honesty .  civil rights are  by and large  respected and     councilman trevize  i speak of sexual morality .     in that case  i certainly don t understand you .  we are a thoroughly moral society  sexually speaking .  women are well represented in every facet of social life .  our mayor is a woman and nearly half the council consists of    the minister allowed a look of exasperation to fleet across her face .   councilman  are you mocking me .  surely you know what sexual morality meant .  is  or is not  marriage a sacrament upon terminus .     what do you mean by sacrament .     is there a formal marriage ceremony binding a couple together .     certainly  if people wish it .  such a ceremony simplifies tax problems and inheritance .     but divorce can take place .     of course .  it would certainly be sexually immoral to keep people tied to  each other  when     are there no religious restrictions .     religious .  there are people who make a philosophy out of ancient cults  but what has that to do with marriage .     councilman  here on comporellon  every aspect of sex is strongly controlled .  it may not take place out of marriage .  its expression is limited even within marriage .  we are sadly shocked at those worlds  at terminus  particularly  where sex seems to be considered a mere social pleasure of no great importance to be indulged in when  how  and with whom one pleases without regard to the values of religion .    trevize shrugged .   i m sorry  but i can t undertake to reform the galaxy  or even terminus and what has this to do with the matter of my ship .     i m talking about public opinion in the matter of your ship and how it limits my ability to compromise the matter .  the people of comporelbll would be horrified if they found you had taken a young and attractive woman on board to serve the lustful urges of you and your companion .  it is out consideration for the safety of the three of you that i have been urging you to accept peaceful surrender in place of a public trial .    trevize said   i see you have used the meal to think of a new type of persuasion by threat .  am i now to fear a lynch mob .     i merely point out dangers .  will you be able to deny that the woman you have taken on board ship is anything other than a sexual convenience .     of course i can deny it .  bliss is the companion of my friend  dr .  pelorat .  he has no other competing companion .  you may not define their state as marriage  but i believe that in pelorat s mind  and in the woman s  too  there is a marriage between them .     are you telling me you are not involved yourself .     certainly not   said trevize .   what do you take me for .     i cannot tell .  i do not know your notions of morality .     then let me explain that my notions of morality tell me that i don t trifle with my friend s possessions or his companionships .     you are not even tempted .     i can t control the fact of temptation  but there s no chance of my giving in to it .     no chance at all .  perhaps you are not interested in women .     don t you believe that .  i am interested .     how long has it been since you have had sex with a woman .     months .  not at all since i left terminus .     surely you don t enjoy that .     i certainly don t   said trevize  with strong feeling   but the situation is such that i have no choice .     surely your friend  pelorat  noting your suffering  would be willing to share his woman .     i show him no evidence of suffering  but if i did  he would not be willing to share bliss .  nor  i think  would the woman consent .  she is not attracted to me .     do you say that because you have tested the matter .     i have not tested it .  i make the judgment without feeling the need to test it .  in any case  i don t particularly like her .     astonishing .  she is what a man would consider attractive .     physically  she is attractive .  nevertheless  she does not appeal to me .  for one thing  she is too young  too child like in some ways .     do you prefer women of maturity  then .    trevize paused .  was there a trap here .  he said cautiously   i am old enough to value some women of maturity .  and what has this to do with my ship .    lizalor said   for a moment  forget your ship .   i am forty six years old  and i am not married .  i have somehow been too busy to marry .     in that case  by the rules of your society  you must have remained continent all your life .  is that why you asked how long it had been since i have had sex .  are you asking my advice in the matter .   if so  i say it is not food and drink .  it is uncomfortable to do without sex  but not impossible .    the minister smiled and there was again that carnivorous look in her eyes .   don t mistake me  trevize .  rank has its privileges and it is possible to be discreet .  i am not altogether an abstainer .  nevertheless  comporellian men are unsatisfying .  i accept the fact that morality is an absolute good  but it does tend to burden the men of this world with guilt  so that they become unadventurous  unenterprising  slow to begin  quick to conclude  and  in general  unskilled .    trevize said  very cautiously   there is nothing i can do about that  either .     are you implying that the fault may be mine .  that i am uninspiring .    trevize raised a hand .   i don t say that at all .     in that case  how would you react  given the opportunity .  you  a man from an immoral world  who must have had a vast variety of sexual experiences of all kinds  who is under the pressure of several months of enforced abstinence even though in the constant presence of a young and charming woman .  how would you react in the presence of a woman such as myself  who is the mature type you profess to like .    trevize said   i would behave with the respect and decency appropriate to your rank and importance .     don t be a fool .   said the minister .  her hand went to the right side of her waist .  the strip of white that encircled it came loose and unwound from her chest and neck .  the bodice of her black gown hung noticeably looser .   trevize sat frozen .  had this been in her mind since  when .  or was it a bribe to accomplish what threats had not .   the bodice flipped down  along with its sturdy reinforcement at the breasts .  the minister sat there  with a look of proud disdain on her face  and bare from the waist up .  her breasts were a smaller version of the woman herself massive  firm  and overpoweringly impressive .    well .   she said .   trevize said  in all honesty   magnificent .     and what will you do about it .     what does morality dictate on comporellon  madam lizalor .     what is that to a man of terminus .  what does your morality dictate .   and begin .  my chest is cold and wishes warmth .    trevize stood up and began to disrobe .     chapter      the nature of earth       .     trevize felt almost drugged  and wondered how much time had elapsed .   beside him lay mitza lizalor  minister of transportation .  she was on her stomach  head to one side  mouth open  snoring distinctly .  trevize was relieved that she was asleep .  once she woke up  he hoped she would be quite aware that she had been asleep .   trevize longed to sleep himself  but he felt it important that he not do so .  she must not wake to find him asleep .  she must realize that while she had been ground down to unconsciousness  he had endured .  she would expect such endurance from a foundation reared immoralist and  at this point  it was better she not be disappointed .   in a way  he had done well .  he had guessed  correctly  that lizalor  given her physical size and strength  her political power  her contempt for the comporellian men she had encountered  her mingled horror and fascination with tales  what had she heard .  trevize wondered  of the sexual feats of the decadents of terminus  would want to be dominated .  she might even expect to be  without being able to express her desire and expectation .   he had acted on that belief and  to his good fortune  found he was correct .   trevize  the ever right  he mocked himself .   it pleased the woman and it enabled trevize to steer activities in a direction that would tend to wear her out while leaving himself relatively untouched .   it had not been easy .  she had a marvelous body  forty six  she had said  but it would not have shamed a twenty five year old athlete  and enormous stamina a stamina exceeded only by the careless zest with which she had spent it .   indeed  if she could be tamed and taught moderation  if practice  but could he himself survive the practice .   brought her to a better sense of her own capacities  and  even more important  his  it might be pleasant to   the snoring stopped suddenly and she stirred .  he placed his hand on the shoulder nearest him and stroked it lightly and her eyes opened .  trevize was leaning on his elbow  and did his best to look unworn and full of life .    i m glad you were sleeping  dear   he said .   you needed your rest .    she smiled at him sleepily and  for one queasy moment  trevize thought she might suggest renewed activity  but she merely heaved herself about till she was resting on her back .  she said  in a soft and satisfied voice   i had you judged correctly from the start .  you are a king of sexuality .    trevize tried to look modest .   i must be more moderate .     nonsense .  you were just right .  i was afraid that you had been kept active and drained by that young woman  but you assured me you had not .  that it true  isn t it .     have i acted like someone who was half sated to begin with .     no  you did not   and her laughter boomed .    are you still thinking of psychic probes .    she laughed again .   are you mad .  would i want to lose you now .     yet it would be better if you lost me temporarily     what .   she frowned .    if i were to stay here permanently  my my dear  how long would it be before eyes would begin to watch  and mouths would begin to whisper .  it i went off on my mission  however  i would naturally return periodically to  report  and it would then be only natural that we should be closeted together for a while and my mission is important .    she thought about that  scratching idly at her right hip .  then she said   i suppose you re right .  i hate the thought but i suppose you re right .     and you need not think i would not come back   said trevize .   i am not so witless as to forget what i would have waiting for me here .    she smiled at him  touched his cheek gently  and said  looking into his eyes     did you find it pleasant  love .     much more than pleasant  dear .     yet you are a foundationer .  a man in the prime of youth from terminus itself .  you must be accustomed to all sorts of women with all soul skills     i have encountered nothing nothing in the least like you   said trevize  with a forcefulness that came easily to someone who was but telling the truth  after all .   lizalor said complacently   well  if you say so .  still  old habits die hard  you know  and i don t think i could bring myself to trust a man s word without some sort of surety .  you and your friend  pelorat  might conceivably go on this mission of yours once i hear about it and approve  but i will keep the young woman here .  she will be well treated  never fear  but i presume your dr .  pelorat will want her  and he will see to it that there are frequent returns to comporellon  even if your enthusiasm for this mission you to stay away too long .     but  lizalor  that s impossible .     indeed .   suspicion at once seeped into her eyes .   why impossible .  for what purpose would you need the woman .     not for sex .  i told you that  and i told you truthfully .  she is pelorat s and i have no interest in her .  besides  i m sure she d break in two if she attempted what you so triumphantly carried through .    lizalor almost smiled  but repressed it and said severely   what is it to you  then  if she remains on comporellon .     because she is of essential importance to our mission .  that is why we must have her .     well  then  what is your mission .  it is time you told me .    trevize hesitated very briefly .  it would have to be the truth .  he could think of no lie as effective .    listen to me   he said .   comporellon may be an old world  even among the oldest  but it can t be the oldest .  human life did not originate here .  the earliest human beings reached here from some other world  and perhaps human life didn t originate there either  but came from still another and still older world .  eventually  though  those probings back into time must stop  and we must reach the first world  the world of human origins .  i am seeking earth .    the change that suddenly came over mitza lizalor staggered him .   her eyes had widened  her breathing took on a sudden urgency  and every muscle seemed to stiffen as she lay there in bed .  her arms shot upward rigidly  and the first two fingers of both hands crossed .    you named it   she whispered hoarsely .      .   she didn t say anything after that  she didn t look at him .  her arms slowly came down  her legs swung over the side of the bed  and she sat up  back to him .  trevize lay where he was  frozen .   he could hear  in memory  the words of munn li compor  as they stood there in the empty tourist center at sayshell .  he could hear him saying of his own ancestral planet the one that trevize was on now  they re superstitious about it .  every time they mention the word  they lift up both hands with first and second fingers crossed to ward off misfortune .    how useless to remember after the fact .    what should i have said  mitza .   he muttered .   she shook her head slightly  stood up  stalked toward and then through a door .  it closed behind her and  after a moment  there was the sound of water running .   he had no recourse but to wait  bare  undignified  wondering whether to join her in the shower  and then quite certain he had better not .  and because  in a way  he felt the shower denied him  he at once experienced a growing need for one .   she emerged at last and silently began to select clothing .   he said   do you mind if i    she said nothing  and he took silence for consent .  he tried to stride into the room in a strong and masculine way but he felt uncommonly as he had in those days when his mother  offended by some misbehavior on his part  offered him no punishment but silence  causing him to shrivel in discomfort .   he looked about inside the smoothly walled cubicle that was bare completely bare .  he looked more minutely .   there was nothing .   he opened the door again  thrust his head out  and said   listen  how are you supposed to start the shower .    she put down the deodorant  at least  trevize guessed that was its function   strode to the shower room and  still without looking at him  pointed .  trevize followed the finger and noted a spot on the wall that was round and faintly pink  barely colored  as though the designer resented having to spoil the starkness of the white  for no reason more important than to give a hint of function .   trevize shrugged lightly  leaned toward the wall  and touched the spot .  presumably that was what one had to do  for in a moment a deluge of fine sprayed water struck him from every direction .  gasping  he touched the spot again and it stopped .   he opened the door  knowing he looked several degrees more undignified still as he shivered hard enough to make it difficult to articulate words .  he croaked   how do you get hot water .    now she looked at him and  apparently  his appearance overcame her anger  or fear  or whatever emotion was victimizing her  for she snickered and then  without warning  boomed her laughter at him .    what hot water .   she said .   do you think we re going to waste the energy to heat water for washing .  that s good mild water you had  water with the chill taken off .  what more do you want .  you sludge soft terminians .   get back in there and wash .    trevize hesitated  but not for long  since it was clear he had no choice in the matter .   with remarkable reluctance he touched the pink spot again and this time steeled his body for the icy spray .  mild water .  he found suds forming on his body and he rubbed hastily here  there  everywhere  judging it to be the wash cycle and suspecting it would not last long .   then came the rinse cycle .  ah  warm  well  perhaps not warm  but not quite as cold  and definitely feeling warm to his thoroughly chilled body .  then  even as he was considering touching the contact spot again to stop the water  and was wondering how lizalor had come out dry when there was absolutely no towel or towel substitute in the place the water stopped .  it was followed by a blast of air that would have certainly bowled him over if it had not come from various directions equally .   it was hot  almost too hot .  it took far less energy  trevize knew  to heat air than to heat water .  the hot air steamed the water off him and  in a few minutes  he was able to step out as dry as though he had never encountered water in his life .   lizalor seemed to have recovered completely .   do you feel well .     pretty well   said trevize .  actually  he felt astonishingly comfortable .   all i had to do was prepare myself for the temperature .  you didn t tell me     sludge soft   said lizalor  with mild contempt .   he borrowed her deodorant  then began to dress  conscious of the fact that she had fresh underwear and he did not .  he said   what should i have called  that world .    she said   we refer to it as the oldest .    he said   how was i to know the name i used was forbidden .  did you tell me .     did you ask .     how was i to know to ask .     you know now .     i m bound to forget .     you had better not .     what s the difference .   trevize felt his temper rising .   it s just a word  a sound .    lizalor said darkly   there are words one doesn t say .  do you say every word you know under all circumstances .     some words are vulgar  some are inappropriate  some under particular circumstances would be hurtful .  which is that word i used .    lizalor said   it s a sad word  a solemn word .  it represents a world that was ancestor to us all and that now doesn t exist .  it s tragic  and we feel it because it was near to us .  we prefer not to speak of it or  if we must  not to use its name .     and the crossing of fingers at me .  how does that relieve the hurt and sadness .    lizalor s face flushed .   that was an automatic reaction  and i don t thank you for forcing it on me .  there are people who believe that the word  even the thought  brings on misfortune and that is how they ward it off .     do you  too  believe crossing fingers wards off misfortune .     no .   well  yes  in a way .  it makes me uneasy if i don t do it .   she didn t look at him .  then  as though eager to shift the subject  she said quickly   and how is that black haired woman of yours of the essence with respect to your mission to reach that world you mentioned .     say  the oldest .   or would you rather not even say that .     i would rather not discuss it at all  but i asked you a question .     i believe that her people reached their present world as emigrants from the oldest .     as we did   said lizalor proudly .    but her people have traditions of some sort which she says are the key to understanding the oldest  but only if we reach it and can study its records .     she is lying .     perhaps  but we must check it out .     if you have this woman with her problematical knowledge  and if you want to reach the oldest with her  why did you come to comporellon .     to find the location of the oldest .  i had a friend once  who  like myself  was a foundationer .  he  however  was descended from comporellian ancestors and he assured me that much of the history of the oldest was well known  on comporellon .     did he indeed .  and did he tell you any of its history .     yes   said trevize  reaching for the truth again .   he said that the oldest was a dead world  entirely radioactive .  he did not know why  but he thought that it might be the result of nuclear explosions .  in a war  perhaps .     no .   said lizalor explosively .    no  there was no war .  or no  the oldest is not radioactive .     it is radioactive  but there was no war .     then how did it become radioactive .  it could not have been radioactive to begin with since human life began on the oldest .  there would have been n  life on it ever .    lizalor seemed to hesitate .  she stood erect  and was breathing deeply    almost gasping .  she said   it was a punishment .  it was a world that used robots .  do you know what robots are .     yes .         they had robots and for that they were punished .  every world that has had robots has been punished and no longer exists .     who punished them  lizalor .     he who punishes .  the forces of history .  i don t know .   she looked away from him  uncomfortable  then said  in a lower voice   ask others .     i would like to  but whom do i ask .  are there those on comporellon who have studied primeval history .     there are .  they are not popular with us with the average comporellian  but the foundation  your foundation  insists on intellectual freedom     they call it .    not a bad insistence  in my opinion   said trevize .   all is bad that is imposed from without   said lizalor .   trevize shrugged .  there was no purpose in arguing the matter .  he bald  x my friend  dr .  pelorat  is himself a primeval historian of a sort .  he would  i   m sure  like to meet his comporellian colleagues .  can you arrange that  lizalor .    she nodded .   there is a historian named vasil deniador  who is based at the university here in the city .  he does not teach class  but he may be able to tell you what you want to know .     why doesn t he teach class .     it s not that he is forbidden  it s just that students do not elect his course .     i presume   said trevize  trying not to say it sardonically   that the students are encouraged not to elect it .     why should they want to .  he is a skeptic .  we have them  you know .  there are always individuals who pit their minds against the general modes of thought and who are arrogant enough to feel that they alone are right and that the many are wrong .     might it not be that that could actually be so in some cases .     never .   snapped lizalor  with a firmness of belief that made it quite clear that no further discussion in that direction would be of any use .   and for all his skepticism  he will be forced to tell you exactly what any comporellian would tell you .     and that is .     that if you search for the oldest  you will not find it .       .   in the private quarters assigned them  pelorat listened to trevize thoughtfully  his long solemn face expressionless  then said   vasil deniador .  i do not recall having heard of him  but it may be that back on the ship i will find papers by him in my library .     are you sure you haven t heard of him .  think .   said trevize .    i don t recall  at the moment  having heard of him   said pelorat cautiously   but after all  my dear chap  there must be hundreds of estimable scholars i haven t heard of  or have  but can t remember .     still  he can t be first class  or you would have heard of him .     the study of earth     practice saying  the oldest   janov .  it would complicate matters otherwise .     the study of the oldest   said pelorat   is not a well rewarded niche in the corridors of learning  so that first class scholars  even in the field of primeval history  would not tend to find their way there .  or  if we put it the other way around  those who are already there do not make enough of a name for themselves in an uninterested world to be considered first class  even if they were .   i am not first class in anyone s estimation  i am sure .    bliss said tenderly   in mine  pel .     yes  certainly in yours  my dear   said pelorat  smiling slightly   but you are not judging me in my capacity as scholar .    it was almost night now  going by the clock  and trevize felt himself grow slightly impatient  as he always did when bliss and pelorat traded endearments .   he said   i ll try to arrange our seeing this deniador tomorrow  but if he knows as little about the matter as the minister does  we re not going to be much better off than we are now .    pelorat said   he may be able to lead us to someone more useful .     i doubt it .  this world s attitude toward earth but i had better practice speaking of it elliptically  too .  this world s attitude toward the oldest is a foolish and superstitious one .   he turned away .   but it s been a rough day and we ought to think of an evening meal if we can face their uninspired cookery and then begin thinking of getting some sleep .  have you two learned how to use the shower .     my dear fellow   said pelorat   we have been very kindly treated .  we ve received all sorts of instructions  most of which we didn t need .    bliss said   listen  trevize .  what about the ship .     what about it .     is the comporellian government confiscating it .     no .  i don t think they will .     ah .  very pleasant .  why aren t they .     because i persuaded the minister to change her mind .    pelorat said   astonishing .  she didn t seem a particularly persuadable individual to me .    bliss said   i don t know .  it was clear from the texture of her mind that  b  was attracted to trevize .    trevize looked at bliss with sudden exasperation .   did you do that  bliss .      what do you mean  trevize .     i mean tamper with her     i didn t tamper .  however  when i noted that she was attracted to you  i couldn t resist just snapping an inhibition or two .  it was a very small thing to do .  those inhibitions might have snapped anyway  and it seemed to be important to make certain that she was filled with good will toward you .     good will .  it was more than that .  she softened  yes  but post coitally .   pelorat said   surely you don t mean  old man     why not .   said trevize testily .   she may be past her first youth  but she knew the art well .  she was no beginner  i assure you .  nor will i play the gentleman and lie on her behalf .  it was her idea thanks to bliss s fiddling with her inhibitions and i was not in a position to refuse  even if that thought had occurred to me  which it didn t .    come  janov  don t stand there looking puritanical .  it s been months since i ve had an opportunity .  you ve   and he waved his hand vaguely in bliss s direction .    believe me  golan   said pelorat  embarrassed   if you are interpreting my expression as puritanical  you mistake me .  i have no objection .    bliss said   but she is puritanical .  i meant to make her warm toward you  i did not count on a sexual paroxysm .    trevize said   but that is exactly what you brought on  my little interfering bliss .  it may be necessary for the minister to play the puritan in public  but if so  that seems merely to stoke the fires .     and so  provided you scratch the itch  she will betray the foundation     she would have done that in any case   said trevize .   she wanted the ship   he broke off  and said in a whisper   are we being overheard .    bliss said   no .     are you sure .     it is certain .  it is impossible to impinge upon the mind of gaia in any unauthorized fashion without gaia being aware of it .     in that case  comporellon wants the ship for itself a valuable addition to its fleet .     surely  the foundation would not allow that .     comporellon does not intend to have the foundation know .    bliss sighed .   there are your isolates .  the minister intends to betray the foundation on behalf of comporellon and  in return for sex  will promptly betray comporellon  too .   and as for trevize  he will gladly sell his body s services as a way of inducing the betrayal .  what anarchy there is in this galaxy of yours .  what chaos .    trevize said coldly   you are wrong  young woman       in what i have just said  i am not a young woman  i am gaia .  i am all of gaia .     then you are wrong  gaia i did not sell my body s services .  i gave them gladly .  i enjoyed it and did no one harm .  as for the consequences  they turned out well from my standpoint and i accept that .  and if comporellon wants the ship for its own purposes  who is to say who is right in this matter .  it is a foundation ship  but it was given to me to search for earth .  it is mine then until i complete the search and i feel that the foundation has no right to go back on its agreement .  as for comporellon  it does not enjoy foundation domination  so it dreams of independence .  in its own eyes  it is correct to do so and to deceive the foundation  for that is not an act of treason to them but an act of patriotism .  who knows .     exactly .  who knows .  in a galaxy of anarchy  how is it possible to sort out reasonable actions from unreasonable ones .  how decide between right and wrong  good and evil  justice and crime  useful and useless .  and how do you explain the minister s betrayal of her own government  when she lets you keep the ship .  does she long for personal independence from an oppressive world .  is she a traitor or a personal one woman self patriot .     to be truthful   said trevize   i don t know that she was willing to let me have my ship simply because she was grateful to me for the pleasure i gave  her .  i believe she made that decision only when i told her i was searching for the oldest .  it is a world of ill omen to her and we and the ship that carries u   by searching for it  have become ill omened  too .  it is my feeling that she feet  she incurred the ill omen for herself and her world by attempting to take the ship  which she may  by now  be viewing with horror .  perhaps she feels that by allowing us and our ship to leave and go about our business  she is averting the misfortune from comporellon and is  in that way  performing a patriotic act .     if that were so  which i doubt  trevize  superstition is the spring of the action .  do you admire that .     i neither admire nor condemn .  superstition always directs action in the absence of knowledge .  the foundation believes in the seldon plan  though no one in our realm can understand it  interpret its details  or use it to predict .  we follow blindly out of ignorance and faith  and isn t that superstition .     yes  it might be .     and gaia  too .  you believe i have given the correct decision in judging that gaia should absorb the galaxy into one large organism  but you do not know why i should be right  or how safe it would be for you to follow that  .  decision .  you are willing to go along only out of ignorance and faith  and are even annoyed with me for trying to find evidence that will remove the ignorance and make mere faith unnecessary .  isn t that superstition .     i think he has you there  bliss   said pelorat .   bliss said   not so .  he will either find nothing at all in this search  or he will find something that confirms his decision .    trevize said   and to back up that belief  you have only ignorance and faith .  in other words  superstition .       .   vasil deniador was a small man  little of feature  with a way of looking up by raising his eyes without raising his head .  this  combined with the brief smiles that periodically lit his face  gave him the appearance of laughing silently at the world .   his office was long and narrow  filled with tapes that seemed to be in wild disorder  not because there was any definite evidence for that  but because they were not evenly placed in their recesses so that they gave the shelves a snaggle toothed appearance .  the three seats he indicated for his visitors were not matched and showed signs of having been recently  and imperfectly  dusted .   he said   janov pelorat  golan trevize  and bliss .   i do not have your second name  madam .     bliss   she said   is all i am usually called   and sat down .    it is enough after all   said deniador  twinkling at her .   you are attractive enough to be forgiven if you had no name at all .    all were sitting now .  deniador said   i have heard of you  dr .  pelorat  though we have never corresponded .  you are a foundationer  are you not .  from terminus .     yes  dr .  deniador .     and you  councilman trevize .  i seem to have heard that recently you were expelled from the council and exiled .  i don t think i have ever understood why .     not expelled  sir .  i am still a member of the council although i don t know when i will take up my duties again .  nor exiled  quite .  i was assigned a mission  concerning which we wish to consult you .     happy to try to help   said deniador .   and the blissful lady .  is she from terminus  too .    trevize interposed quickly .   she is from elsewhere  doctor .     ah  a strange world  this elsewhere .  a most unusual collection of human beings are native to it .   but since two of you are from the foundation s capital at terminus  and the third is an attractive young woman  and mitza lizalor is not known for her affection for either category  how is it that she recommends you to my care so warmly .     i think   said trevize   to get rid of us .  the sooner you help us  you see  the sooner we will leave comporellon .    deniador eyed trevize with interest  again the twinkling smile  and said   of course  a vigorous young man such as yourself might attract her whatever his origin .  she plays the role of cold vestal well  but not perfectly .     i know nothing about that   said trevize stiffly .    and you had better not .  in public  at least .  but i am a skeptic and i am professionally unattuned to believing in surfaces .  so come  councilman  what is your mission .  let me find out if i can help you .    trevize said   in this  dr .  pelorat is our spokesman .     i have no objection to that   said deniador .   dr .  pelorat .    pelorat said   to put it at the simplest  dear doctor  i have all my mature life attempted to penetrate to the basic core of knowledge concerning the world on which the human species originated  and i was sent out along with my good friend  golan trevize although  to be sure  i did not know him at the time to find  if we could  the uh oldest  i believe you call it .     the oldest .   said deniador .   i take it you mean earth .    pelorat s jaw dropped .  then he said  with a slight stutter   i was under the impression that is  i was given to understand that one did not    he looked at trevize  rather helplessly .   trevize said   minister lizalor told me that that word was not used on comporellon .     you mean she did this .   deniador s mouth turned downward  his nose screwed up  and he thrust his arms vigorously forward  crossing the first two fingers on each hand .    yes   said trevize .   that s what i mean .    deniador relaxed and laughed .   nonsense  gentlemen .  we do it as a matter of habit  and in the backwoods they may be serious about it but  on the whole  it doesn t matter .  i don t know any comporellian who wouldn t say  earth  when annoyed or startled .  it s the most common vulgarism we have .     vulgarism .   said pelorat faintly .    or expletive  if you prefer .     nevertheless   said trevize   the minister seemed quite upset when i used the word .     oh well  she s a mountain woman .     what does that mean  sir .     what it says .  mitza lizalor is from the central mountain range .  the children out there are brought up in what is called the good old fashioned way  which means that no matter how well educated they become you can never knock those crossed fingers out of them .     then the word  earth  doesn t bother you at all  does it  doctor .   said bliss .    not at all  dear lady .  i am a skeptic .    trevize said   i know what the word  skeptic  means in galactic  but how .  do you use the word .     exactly as you do  councilman .  i accept only what i am forced to accept by reasonably reliable evidence  and keep that acceptance tentative pending the arrival of further evidence .  that doesn t make us popular .     why not .   said trevize .    we wouldn t be popular anywhere .  where is the world whose people don t prefer a comfortable  warm  and well worn belief  however illogical  to the chilly winds of uncertainty .   consider how you believe in the seldon plan without evidence .     yes   said trevize  studying his finger ends .   i put that forward yesterday as an example  too .    pelorat said   may i return to the subject  old fellow .  what is known about earth that a skeptic would accept .    deniador said   very little .  we can assume that there is a single planet on which the human species developed  because it is unlikely in the extreme that the same species  so nearly identical as to be interfertile  would develop on a number of worlds  or even on just two  independently .  we can choose to cal  this world of origin earth .  the belief is general  here  that earth exists in this corner of the galaxy  for the worlds here are unusually old and it is likely that the first worlds to be settled were close to earth rather than far from it .     and has the earth any unique characteristics aside from being the planet of origin .   asked pelorat eagerly .    do you have something in mind .   said deniador  with his quick smile .    i m thinking of its satellite  which some call the moon .  that would be unusual  wouldn t it .     that s a leading question  dr .  pelorat .  you may be putting thoughts into my mind .     i do not say what it is that would make the moon unusual .     its size  of course .  am i right .   yes  i see i am .  all the legends of earth speak of its vast array of living species and of its vast satellite one that is some three thousand to three thousand five hundred kilometers in diameter .  the vast array of life is easy to accept since it would naturally have come about through biological evolution  if what we know of the process is accurate .  a giant satellite is more difficult to accept .  no other inhabited world in the galaxy has such a satellite .  large satellites are invariably associated with the uninhabited and uninhabitable gas giants .  as a skeptic  then  i prefer not to accept the existence of the moon .    pelorat said   if earth is unique in its possession of millions of species  might it not also be unique in its possession of a giant satellite .  one uniqueness might imply the other .    deniador smiled .   i don t see how the presence of millions of species on earth could create a giant satellite out of nothing .     but the other way around  perhaps a giant satellite could help create the millions of species .     i don t see how that could be either .    trevize said   what about the story of earth s radioactivity .     that is universally told  universally believed .     but   said trevize   earth could not have been so radioactive as to preclude life in the billions of years when it supported life .  how did it become radioactive .  a nuclear war .     that is the most common opinion  councilman trevize .     from the manner in which you say that  i gather you don t believe it .     there is no evidence that such a war took place .  common belief  even universal belief  is not  in itself  evidence .     what else might have happened .     there is no evidence that anything happened .  the radioactivity might be as purely invented a legend as the large satellite .    pelorat said   what is the generally accepted story of earth s history .  i have  during my professional career  collected a large number of origin legends  many of them involving a world called earth  or some name very much like that .  i have none from comporellon  nothing beyond the vague mention of a benbally who might have come from nowhere for all that comporellian legends say .     that s not surprising .  we don t usually export our legends and i m astonished you have found references even to benbally .  superstition  again .     but you are not superstitious and you would not hesitate to talk about it  would you .     that s correct   said the small historian  casting his eyes upward at pelorat .   it would certainly add greatly  perhaps even dangerously  to my unpopularity if i did  but you three are leaving comporellon soon and i take it you will never quote me as a source .     you have our word of honor   said pelorat quickly .    then here is a summary of what is supposed to have happened  shorn of any supernaturalism or moralizing .  earth existed as the sole world of human beings for an immeasurable period and then  about  twenty to twenty five thousand years ago  the human species developed interstellar travel by way of the hyperspatial jump and colonized a group of planets .    the settlers on these planets made use of robots  which had first been devised on earth before the days of hyperspatial travel and do you know what robots are  by the way .     yes   said trevize .   we have been asked that more than once .  we know what robots are .     the settlers  with a thoroughly roboticized society  developed a high technology and unusual longevity and despised their ancestral world .  according to more dramatic versions of their story  they dominated and oppressed the ancestral world .    eventually  then  earth sent out a new group of settlers  among whom robots were forbidden .  of the new worlds  comporellon was among the first .  our own patriots insist it was the first  but there is no evidence of that that a skeptic can accept .  the first group of settlers died out  and    trevize said   why did the first set die out  dr .  deniador .     why .  usually they are imagined by our romantics as having been punished for their crimes by he who punishes  though no one bothers to say why he waited so long .  but one doesn t have to resort to fairy tales .  it is easy to argue that a society that depends totally on robots becomes soft and decadent  dwindling and dying out of sheer boredom or  more subtly  by losing the will to live .    the second wave of settlers  without robots  lived on and took over the entire galaxy  but earth grew radioactive and slowly dropped out of sight .  the reason usually given for this is that there were robots on earth  too  since the first wave had encouraged that .    bliss  who had listened to the account with some visible impatience  said   well  dr .  deniador  radioactivity or not  and however many waves of settlers there might have been  the crucial question is a simple one .  exactly where is earth .  what are its co ordinates .    deniador said   the answer to that question is  i don t know .   but come  it is time for lunch .  i can have one brought in  and we can discuss earth over it for as long as you want .     you don t know .   said trevize  the sound of his voice rising in pitch and intensity .    actually  as far as i know  no one knows .     but that is impossible .     councilman   said deniador  with a soft sigh   if you wish to call the truth impossible  that is your privilege  but it will get you nowhere .      chapter      leaving comporellon       .     luncheon consisted of a heap of soft  crusty balls that came in different shades and that contained a variety of fillings .   deniador picked up a small object which unfolded into a pair of thin     transparent gloves  and put them on .  his guests followed suit .   bliss said   what is inside these objects  please .    deniador said   the pink ones are filled with spicy chopped fish  a great comporellian delicacy .  these yellow ones contain a cheese filling that is very mild .  the green ones contain a vegetable mixture .  do eat them while they are a quite warm .  later we will have hot almond pie and the usual beverages .  i might recommend the hot cider .  in a cold climate  we have a tendency to heat our foods  even desserts .     you do yourself well   said pelorat .    not really   said deniador .   i m being hospitable to guests .  for myself  i   y  get along on very little .  i don t have much body mass to support  as you haul  probably noticed .      trevize bit into one of the pink ones and found it very fishy indeed  with all overlay of spices that was pleasant to the taste but which  he thought  along with the fish itself  would remain with him for the rest of the day and  perhaps  into the night .   when he withdrew the object with the bite taken out of it  he found that the crust had closed in over the contents .  there was no squirt  no leakage  and  for a moment  he wondered at the purpose of the gloves .  these seemed no chance of getting his hands moist and sticky if he didn t use them  so he decided it was a matter of hygiene .  the gloves substituted for a washing of the hands if that were inconvenient and custom  probably  now dictated their use even if the hands were washed .   lizalor hadn t used gloves when he had eaten with her the day before .   perhaps that was because she was a mountain woman .    he said   would it be unmannerly to talk business over lunch .     by comporellian standards  councilman  it would be  but you are my guests  and we will go by your standards .  if you wish to speak seriously  and do not think or care that that might diminish your pleasure in the food  please do so  and i will join you .    trevize said   thank you .  minister lizalor implied no  she stated quite bluntly that skeptics were unpopular on this world .  is that so .    deniador s good humor seemed to intensify .   certainly .  how hurt we d be if we weren t .  comporellon  you see  is a frustrated world .  without any knowledge of the details  there is the general mythic belief  that once  many millennia ago  when the inhabited galaxy was small  comporellon was the leading world .  we never forget that  and the fact that in known history we have not been leaders irks us  fills us the population in general  that is with a feeling of injustice .    yet what can we do .  the government was forced to be a loyal vassal of the emperor once  and is a loyal associate of the foundation now .  and the more we are made aware of our subordinate position  the stronger the belief in the great  mysterious days of the past become .    what  then  can comporellon do .  they could never defy the empire in older times and they can t openly defy the foundation now .  they take refuge  therefore  in attacking and hating us  since we don t believe the legends and laugh at the superstitions .    nevertheless  we are safe from the grosser effects of persecution .  we control the technology  and we fill the faculties of the universities .  some of us  who are particularly outspoken  have difficulty in teaching classes openly .  i have that difficulty  for instance  though i have my students and hold meetings quietly off campus .  nevertheless  if we were really driven out of public life  the technology would fail and the universities would lose accreditation with the galaxy generally .  presumably  such is the folly of human beings  the prospects of intellectual suicide might not stop them from indulging their hatred  but the foundation supports us .  therefore  we are constantly scolded and sneered at and denounced and never touched .    trevize said   is it popular opposition that keeps you from telling us where earth is .  do you fear that  despite everything  the anti skeptic feeling might turn ugly if you go too far .    deniador shook his head .   no .  earth s location is unknown .  i am not hiding anything from you out of fear or for any other reason .     but look   said trevize urgently .   there are a limited number of planets in this sector of the galaxy that possess the physical characteristics associated with habitability  and almost all of them must be not only inhabitable  but inhabited  and therefore well known to you .  how difficult would it be to explore the sector for a planet that would be habitable were it not for the fact that it was radioactive .  besides that  you would look for such a planet with a large  satellite in attendance .  between radioactivity and a large satellite  earth would be absolutely unmistakable and could not be missed even with only a casual search .  it might take some time but that would be the only difficulty .    deniador said   the skeptic s view is  of course  that earth s radioactivity and its large satellite are both simply legends .  if we look for them  we look for sparrow milk and rabbit feathers .     perhaps  but that shouldn t stop comporellon from at least taking on the search .  if they find a radioactive world of the proper size for habitability  with a large satellite  what an appearance of credibility it would lend to comporellian legendry in general .    deniador laughed .   it may be that comporellon doesn t search for that very reason .  if we fail  or if we find an earth obviously different from the legends  the reverse would take place .  comporellian legendry in general would be blasted and made into a laughingstock .  comporellon wouldn t risk that .    trevize paused  then went on  very earnestly   besides  even if we discount those two uniquities if there is such a word in galactic of radioactivity and a large satellite  there is a third that  by definition  must exist  without any reference to legends .  earth must have upon it either a flourishing life of incredible diversity  or the remnants of one  or  at the very least  the fossil record of such a one .    deniador said   councilman  while comporellon has sent out no organized search party for earth  we do have occasion to travel through space  and we occasionally have reports from ships that have strayed from their intended routes for one reason or another .  jumps are not always perfect  as perhaps you know .  nevertheless  there have been no reports of any planets with properties resembling those of the legendary earth  or any planet that is bursting with life .  nor is any ship likely to land on what seems an uninhabited planet in order that the crew might go fossil hunting .  if  then  in thousands of years nothing of the sort has been reported  i am perfectly willing to believe that locating earth is impossible  because earth is not there to be located .    trevize said  in frustration   but earth must be somewhere .  somewhere there is a planet on which humanity and all the familiar forms of life associated with humanity evolved .  if earth is not in this section of the galaxy  it must be elsewhere .     perhaps   said deniador cold bloodedly   but in all this time  it hasn t turned up anywhere .     people haven t really looked for it .     well  apparently you are .  i wish you luck  but i would never bet on your success .    trevize said   have there been attempts to determine the possible position of earth by indirect means  by some means other than a direct search .     yes   said two voices at once .  deniador  who was the owner of one of the voices  said to pelorat   are you thinking of yariffs project .     i am   said pelorat .    then would you explain it to the councilman .  i think he would more readily believe you than me .    pelorat said   you see  golan  in the last days of the empire  there was a time when the search for origins  as they called it  was a popular pastime  perhaps to get away from the unpleasantness of the surrounding reality .  the empire was in a process of disintegration at that time  you know .    it occurred to a livian historian  humbal yariff  that whatever the planet of origin  it would have settled worlds near itself sooner than it would settle planets farther away .  in general  the farther a world from the point of origin the later it would have been settled .    suppose  then  one recorded the date of settlement of all habitable planets in the galaxy  and made networks of all that were a given number of millennia old .  there could be a network drawn through all planets ten thousand years old  another through those twelve thousand years old  still another through those fifteen thousand years old .  each network would  in theory  be roughly spherical and they should be roughly concentric .  the older networks would form spheres smaller in radius than the younger ones  and if one worked out all the centers they should fall within a comparatively small volume of space that would include the planet of origin earth .    pelorat s face was very earnest as he kept drawing spherical surfaces with his cupped hands .   do you see my point  golan .    trevize nodded .   yes .  but i take it that it didn t work .     theoretically  it should have  old fellow .  one trouble was that times of origin were totally inaccurate .  every world exaggerated its own age to one degree or another and there was no easy way of determining age independently of legend .    bliss said   carbon    decay in ancient timber .     certainly  dear   said pelorat   but you would have had to get co operation from the worlds in question  and that was never given .  no world wanted its own exaggerated claim of age to be destroyed and the empire was then in no position to override local objections in a matter so unimportant .  it had other things on its mind .    all that yariff could do was to make use of worlds that were only two thousand years old at most  and whose founding had been meticulously recorded under reliable circumstances .  there were few of those  and while they were distributed in roughly spherical symmetry  the center was relatively close to trantor  the imperial capital  because that was where the colonizing expeditions had originated for those relatively few worlds .    that  of course  was another problem .  earth was not the only point of origin of settlement for other worlds .  as time went on  the older worlds sent out settlement expeditions of their own  and at the time of the height of empire  trantor was a rather copious source of those .  yariff was  rather unfairly  laughed at and ridiculed and his professional reputation was destroyed .    trevize said   i get the story  janov .   dr .  deniador  is there then nothing at all you could give me that represents the faintest possibility of hope .  is there any other world where it is conceivable there may be some information concerning earth .    deniador sank into doubtful thought for a while .   we e ell   he said at last  drawing out the word hesitantly   as a skeptic i must tell you that i m not sure that earth exists  or has ever existed .  however   he fell silent again .   finally  bliss said   i think you ve thought of something that might be important  doctor .     important .  i doubt it   said deniador faintly .   perhaps amusing  however .  earth is not the only planet whose position is a mystery .  there are the worlds of the first group of settlers  the spacers  as they are called in our legends .  some call the planets they inhabited the  spacer worlds   others call them the  forbidden worlds .   the latter name is now the usual one .    in their pride and prime  the legend goes  the spacers had lifetimes stretching out for centuries  and refused to allow our own short lived ancestors to land on their worlds .  after we had defeated them  the situation was reversed .  we scorned to deal with them and left them to themselves  forbidding our own ships and traders to deal with them .  hence those planets became the forbidden worlds .  we were certain  so the legend states  that he who punishes would destroy them without our intervention  and  apparently  he did .  at least  no spacer has appeared in the galaxy to our knowledge  in many millennia .     do you think that the spacers would know about earth .   said trevize .    conceivably  since their worlds were older than any of ours .  that is  if any spacers exist  which is extremely unlikely .     even if they don t exist  their worlds do and may contain records .     if you can find the worlds .    trevize looked exasperated .   do you mean to say that the key to earth  the location of which is unknown  may be found on spacer worlds  the location of which is also unknown .    deniador shrugged .   we have had no dealings with them for twenty thousand years .  no thought of them .  they  too  like earth  have receded into the mists .     how many worlds did the spacers live on .     the legends speak of fifty such worlds  a suspiciously round number .  there were probably far fewer .     and you don t know the location of a single one of the fifty .     well  now  i wonder     what do you wonder .    deniador said   since primeval history is my hobby  as it is dr .  pelorat s  i have occasionally explored old documents in search of anything that might refer to early time  something more than legends .  last year  i came upon the records of an old ship  records that were almost indecipherable .  it dated back to the very old days when our world was not yet known as comporellon .  the name  baleyworld  was used  which  it seems to me  may be an even earlier form of the  benbally world  of our legends .    pelorat said  excitedly   have you published .     no   said deniador .   i do not wish to dive until i am sure there is water in the swimming pool  as the old saying has it .  you see  the record says that the captain of the ship had visited a spacer world and taken off with him a spacer woman .    bliss said   but you said that the spacers did not allow visitors .     exactly  and that is the reason i don t publish the material .  it sounds incredible .  there are vague tales that could be interpreted as referring to the spacers and to their conflict with the settlers our own ancestors .   such tales exist not only on comporellon but on many worlds in many variations  but all are in absolute accord in one respect .  the two groups  spacers and settlers  did not mingle .  there was no social contact  let alone sexual contact  and yet apparently the settler captain and the spacer woman were held together by bonds of love .  this is so incredible that i see no chance of the story being accepted as anything but  at best  a piece of romantic historical fiction .    trevize looked disappointed .   is that all .     no  councilman  there is one more matter .  i came across some figures in what was left of the log of the ship that might or might not represent spatial co ordinates .  if they were and i repeat  since my skeptic s honor compels me to  that they might not be then internal evidence made me conclude they were the spatial co ordinates of three of the spacer worlds .  one of them might be the spacer world where the captain landed and from which he withdrew his spacer love .    trevize said   might it not be that even if the tale is fiction  the coordinates are real .     it might be   said deniador .   i will give you the figures  and you are free to use them  but you might get nowhere .   and yet i have an amusing notion .   his quick smile made its appearance .    what is that .   said trevize .    what if one of those sets of co ordinates represented earth .       .   comporellon s sun  distinctly orange  was larger in appearance than the sun of terminus  but it was low in the sky and gave out little heat .  the wind  fortunately light  touched trevize s cheek with icy fingers .   he shivered inside the electrified coat he had been given by mitza lizalor  who now stood next to him .  he said   it must warm up sometime  mitza .    she glanced up at the sun briefly  and stood there in the emptiness of the spaceport  showing no signs of discomfort tall  large  wearing a lighter coat than trevize had on  and if not impervious to the cold  at least scornful of it .   she said   we have a beautiful summer .  it is not a long one but our food crops are adapted to it .  the strains are carefully chosen so that they grow quickly in the sun and do not frostbite easily .  our domestic animals are well furred  and comporellian wool is the best in the galaxy by general admission .  then  too  we have farm settlements in orbit about comporellon that grow   tropical fruit .  we actually export canned pineapples of superior flavor .  most  people who know us as a cold world don t know that .    trevize said   i thank you for coming to see us off  mitza  and for being willing to co operate with us on this mission of ours .  for my own peace of mind  however  i must ask whether you will find yourself in serious trouble over this .     no .   she shook her head proudly .   no trouble .  in the first place  i will not be questioned .  i am in control of transportation  which means i alone set the rules for this spaceport and others  for the entry stations  for the ships that come and go .  the prime minister depends on me for all that and is only too delighted to remain ignorant of its details .   and even if i were questioned  i have but to tell the truth .  the government would applaud me for not turning the ship over to the foundation .  so would the people if it were safe to let them know .  and the foundation itself would not know of it .    trevize said   the government might be willing to keep the ship from the foundation  but would they be willing to approve your letting us take it away .    lizalor smiled .   you are a decent human being  trevize .  you have fought tenaciously to keep your ship and now that you have it you take the trouble to concern yourself with my welfare .   she reached toward him tentatively as though tempted to give some sign of affection and then  with obvious difficulty  controlled the impulse .   she said  with a renewed brusqueness   even if they question my decision  i have but to tell them that you have been  and still are  searching for the oldest  and they will say i did well to get rid of you as quickly as i did  ship and all  and they will perform the rites of atonement that you were ever allowed to land in the first place  though there was no way we might have guessed what you were doing .     do you truly fear misfortune to yourself and the world because of my presence .     indeed   said lizalor stolidly .  then she said  more softly   you have brought misfortune to me  already  for now that i have known you  comporellian men will seem more sapless still .  i will be left with an unappeasable longing .  he who punishes has already seen to that .    trevize hesitated  then said   i do not wish you to change your mind on this matter  but i do not wish you to suffer needless apprehension  either .  you must know that this matter of my bringing misfortune on you is simply superstition .     the skeptic told you that  i presume .     i know it without his telling me .    lizalor brushed her face  for a thin rime was gathering on her prominent eyebrows and said   i know there are some who think it superstition .  that the oldest brings misfortune is  however  a fact .  it has been demonstrated many times and all the clever skeptical arguments can t legislate the truth out of existence .    she thrust out her  . hand suddenly .   good bye  golan .  get on the ship and join your companions before your soft terminian body freezes in our cold  but kindly wind .     good bye  mitza  and i hope to see you when i return .     yes  you have promised to return and i have tried to believe that you would .  i have even told myself that i would come out and meet you at your ship in space so that misfortune would fall only on me and not upon my world but you will not return .     not so .  i will .  i would not give you up that easily  having had pleasure of you .   and at that moment  trevize was firmly convinced that he meant it .    i do not doubt your romantic impulses  my sweet foundationer  but those who venture outward on a search for the oldest will never come back anywhere .  i know that in my heart .    trevize tried to keep his teeth from chattering .  it was from cold and he didn t want her to think it was from fear .  he said   that  too  is superstition .     and yet   she said   that  too  is true .       .   it was good t  be back in the pilot room of the far star .  it might be  tamped for room .  it might be a bubble of imprisonment in infinite space .  nevertheless  it was familiar  friendly  and warm .   bliss said   i m glad you finally came aboard .  i was wondering how long you would remain with the minister .     not long   said trevize .   it was cold .     it seemed to me   said bliss   that you were considering remaining with her and postponing the search for earth .  i do not like to probe your mind even lightly  but i was concerned for you and that temptation under which you labored seemed to leap out at me .    trevize said   you re quite right .  momentarily at least  i felt the temptation .  the minister is a remarkable woman and i ve never met anyone quite like her .   did you strengthen my resistance  bliss .    she said   i ve told you many times i must not and will not tamper with your mind in any way  trevize .  you beat down the temptation  i imagine  through your strong sense of duty .     no  i rather think not .   he smiled wryly .   nothing so dramatic and noble .  my resistance was strengthened  for one thing  by the fact that is was cold  and for another  by the sad thought that it wouldn t take many sessions with her to kill me .  i could never keep up the pace .    pelorat said   well  anyway  you are safely aboard .  what are we going to do next .     in the immediate future  we are going to move outward through the planetary system at a brisk pace until we are far enough from comporellon s sun to make a jump .     do you think we will be stopped or followed .     no  i really think that the minister is anxious only that we go away as rapidly as possible and stay away  in order that the vengeance of he who punishes not fall upon the planet .  in fact     she believes the vengeance will surely fall on us .  she is under the firm conviction that we will never return .  this  i hasten to add  is not an estimate of my probable level of infidelity  which she has had no occasion to measure .  she meant that earth is so terrible a bearer of misfortune that anyone who seeks it must die in the process .    bliss said   how many have left comporellon in search of earth that she can make such a statement .     i doubt that any comporellian has ever left on such a search .  i told her that her fears were mere superstition .     are you sure you believe that  or have you let her shake you .     i know her fears are the purest superstition in the form she expresses them  but they may be well founded just the same .     you mean  radioactivity will kill us if we try to land on it .     i don t believe that earth is radioactive .  what i do believe is that earth protects itself .  remember that all reference to earth in the library on trantor has been removed .  remember that gaia s marvelous memory  in which all the planet takes part down to the rock strata of the surface and the molten metal at the core  stops short of penetrating far enough back to tell us anything of earth .    clearly  if earth is powerful enough to do that  it might also be capable of adjusting minds in order to force belief in its radioactivity  and thus preventing any search for it .  perhaps because comporellon is so close that it represents a particular danger to earth  there is the further reinforcement of a curious blankness .  deniador  who is a skeptic and a scientist  is utterly convinced that there is no use searching for earth .  he says it cannot be found .   and that is why the minister s superstition may be well founded .  if earth is so intent on concealing itself  might it not kill us  or distort us  rather than allow us to find it .    bliss frowned and said   gaia    trevize said quickly   don t say gaia will protect us .  since earth was able to remove gaia s earliest memories  it is clear that in any conflict between the two earth will win .    bliss said coldly   how do you know that the memories were removed .  it might be that it simply took time for gaia to develop a planetary memory and that we can now probe backward only to the time of the completion of that development .  and if the memory was removed  how can you be sure that it was earth that did it .    trevize said   i don t know .  i merely advance my speculations .    pelorat put in  rather timidly   if earth is so powerful  and so intent on preserving its privacy  so to speak  of what use is our search .  you seem to think earth won t allow us to succeed and will kill us if that will be what it takes to keep us from succeeding .  in that case  is there any sense in not abandoning this whole thing .     it might seem we ought to give up  i admit  but i have this powerful conviction that earth exists  and i must and will find it .  and gaia tells me that when i have powerful convictions of this sort  i am always right .     but how can we survive the discovery  old chap .     it may be   said trevize  with an effort at lightness   that earth  too  will recognize the value of my extraordinary rightness and will leave me to myself .  but and this is what i am finally getting at i cannot be certain that you two will survive and that is of concern to me .  it always has been  but it is increasing now and it seems to me that i ought to take you two back to gaia and then proceed on my own .  it is i  not you  who first decided i must search for earth  it is i  not you  who see value in it  it is    not you  who am driven .  let it be i  then  not you  who take the risk .  let me go on alone .   janov .    pelorat s long face seemed to grow longer as he buried his chin in his neck .   i won t deny i feel nervous  golan  but i d be ashamed to abandon you .  i would disown myself if i did so .     bliss .     gaia will not abandon you  trevize  whatever you do .  if earth should prove dangerous  gaia will protect you as far as it can .  and in any case  in my role as bliss  i will not abandon pel  and if he clings to you  then i certainly cling to him .    trevize said grimly   very well  then .  i ve given you your chance .  we go on together .     together   said bliss .   pelorat smiled slightly  and gripped trevize s shoulder .   together .  always .       .   bliss said   look at that  pel .    she had been making use of the ship s telescope by hand  almost aimlessly  as a change from pelorat s library of earth legendry .   pelorat approached  placed an arm about her shoulders and looked at the viewscreen .  one of the gas giants of the comporellian planetary system was in sight  magnified till it seemed the large body it really was .   in color it was a soft orange streaked with paler stripes .  viewed from the planetary plane  and more distant from the sun than the ship itself was  it was almost a complete circle of light .    beautiful   said pelorat .    the central streak extends beyond the planet  pel .    pelorat furrowed his brow and said   you know  bliss  i believe it does     do you suppose it s an optical illusion .    pelorat said   i m not sure  bliss .  i m as much a space novice as you am    golan .    trevize answered the call with a rather feeble  what is it .   and entered the pilot room  looking a bit rumpled  as though he had just been napping on his bed with his clothes on which was exactly what he had been doing .   he said  in a rather peevish way   please .  don t be handling the instruments .     it s just the telescope   said pelorat .   look at that .    trevize did .   it s a gas giant  the one they call gallia  according to the information i was given .     how can you tell it s that one  just looking .     for one thing   said trevize   at our distance from the sun  and because of the planetary sizes and orbital positions  which i ve been studying in plotting our course  that s the only one you could magnify to that extent et this time .  for another thing  there s the ring .     ring .   said bliss  mystified .    all you can see is a thin  pale marking  because we re viewing it almost edge on .  we can zoom up out of the planetary plane and give you a better view .  would you like that .    pelorat said   i don t want to make you have to recalculate positions and courses  golan .      oh well  the computer will do it for me with little trouble .   he sat down at the computer as he spoke and placed his hands on the markings that received them .  the computer  finely attuned to his mind  did the rest .   the far star  free of fuel problems or of inertial sensations  accelerated rapidly  and once again  trevize felt a surge of love for a computer and ship that responded in such a way to him as though it was his thought that powered and directed it  as though it were a powerful and obedient extension of his will .   it was no wonder the foundation wanted it back  no wonder comporellon had wanted it for itself .  the only surprise was that the force of superstition had been strong enough to cause comporellon to be willing to give it up .   properly armed  it could outrun or outfight any ship in the galaxy  or any combination of ships provided only that it did not encounter another ship like itself .   of course  it was not properly armed .  mayor branno  in assigning him the ship  had at least been cautious enough to leave it unarmed .   pelorat and bliss watched intently as the planet  gallia  slowly  slowly  tipped toward them .  the upper pole  whichever it was  became visible  with turbulence in a large circular region around it  while the lower pole retired behind the bulge of the sphere .   at the upper end  the dark side of the planet invaded the sphere of orange light  and the beautiful circle became increasingly lopsided .   what seemed more exciting was that the central pale streak was no longer straight but had come to be curved  as were the other streaks to the north and south  but more noticeably so .   now the central streak extended beyond the edges of the planet very distinctly and did so in a narrow loop on either side .  there was no question of illusion  its nature was apparent .  it was a ring of matter  looping about the planet  and hidden on the far side .    that s enough to give you the idea  i think   said trevize .   if we were to move over the planet  you would see the ring in its circular form  concentric about the planet  touching it nowhere .  you ll probably see that it s not one ring either but several concentric rings .     i wouldn t have thought it possible   said pelorat blankly .   what keeps it in space .     the same thing that keeps a satellite in space   said trevize .   the rings consist of tiny particles  every one of which is orbiting the planet .  the rings are so close to the planet that tidal effects prevent it from coalescing into a single body .    pelorat shook his head .   it s horrifying when i think of it  old man .  how is it possible that i can have spent my whole life as a scholar and yet know so little about astronomy .     and i know nothing at all about the myths of humanity .  no one can encompass all of knowledge .   the point is that these planetary rings aren t unusual .  almost every single gas giant has them  even if it s only a thin curve of dust .  as it happens  the sun of terminus has no true gas giant in its planetary family  so unless a terminian is a space traveler  or has taken university instruction in astronomy  he s likely to know nothing about planetary rings .  what is unusual is a ring that is sufficiently broad to be bright and noticeable  like that one .  it s beautiful .  it must be a couple of hundred kilometers wide  at least .    at this point  pelorat snapped his fingers .   that s what it meant .    bliss looked startled .   what is it  pel .    pelorat said   i came across a scrap of poetry once  very ancient  and in an archaic version of galactic that was hard to make out but that was good evidence of great age .   though i shouldn t complain of the archaism  old chap .  my work has made me an expert on various varieties of old galactic  which is quite gratifying even if it is of no use to me whatever outside my work .   what was i talking about .    bliss said   an old scrap of poetry  pel dear .     thank you  bliss   he said .  and to trevize   she keeps close track of what i say in order to pull me back whenever i get off course  which is most of the time .     it s part of your charm  pel   said bliss  smiling .    anyway  this scrap of poetry purported to describe the planetary system of which earth was part .  why it should do so  i don t know  for the poem as a whole does not survive  at least  i was never able to locate it .  only this one portion survived  perhaps because of its astronomical content .  in any case  it spoke of the brilliant triple ring of the sixth planet  both brade and large  sae the woruld shronk in comparisoun .   i can still quote it  you see .  i didn t understand what a planet s ring could be .  i remember thinking of three circles on one side of the planet  all in a row .  it seemed so nonsensical  i didn t bother to include it in my library .  i m sorry now i didn t inquire .   he shook his head .   being a mythologist in today s galaxy is so solitary a job  one forgets the good of inquiring .    trevize said consolingly   you were probably right to ignore it  janov .  it s a mistake to take poetic chatter literally .     but that s what was meant   said pelorat  pointing at the screen .   that s what the poem was speaking of .  three wide rings  concentric  wider than the planet itself .    trevize said   i never heard of such a thing .  i don t think rings can be that wide .  compared to the planet they circle  they are always very narrow .    pelorat said   we never heard of a habitable planet with a giant satellite  either .  or one with a radioactive crust .  this is uniqueness  . number three .  if we find a radioactive planet that might be otherwise habitable  with a giant satellite  and with another planet in the system that has a huge ring  there would be no doubt at all that we had encountered earth .    trevize smiled .   i agree  janov .  if we find all three  we will certainly have found earth .     if .   said bliss  with a sigh .      .   they were beyond the main worlds of the planetary system  plunging outward between the positions of the two outermost planets so that there was now no significant mass within   .   billion kilometers .  ahead lay only the vast cometary cloud which  gravitationally  was insignificant .   the far star had accelerated to a speed of   .   c  one tenth the speed of light .  trevize knew well that  in theory  the ship could be accelerated to nearly the speed of light  but he also knew that  in practice    .   c was the reasonable limit .   at that speed  any object with appreciable mass could be avoided  but there was no way of dodging the innumerable dust particles in space  and  to a far greater extent even  individual atoms and molecules .  at very fast speeds  even such small objects could do damage  scouring and scraping the ship s hull .  at speeds near the speed of light  each atom smashing into the hull had the properties of a cosmic ray particle .  under that penetrating cosmic radiation  anyone on board ship would not long survive .   the distant stars showed no perceptible motion in the viewscreen  and even though the ship was moving at thirty thousand kilometers per second  there was every appearance of its standing still .   the computer scanned space to great distances for any oncoming object of small but significant size that might be on a collision course  and the ship veered gently to avoid it  in the extremely unlikely case that that would be necessary .  between the small size of any possible oncoming object  the speed with which it was passed  and the lack of inertial effect as the result of the course change  there was no way of telling whether anything ever took place in the nature of what might be termed a  close call .    trevize  therefore  did not worry about such things  or even give it the most casual thought .  he kept his full attention on the three sets of co ordinates he had been given by deniador  and  particularly  on the set which indicated the object closest to themselves .    is there something wrong with the figures .   asked pelorat anxiously .    i can t tell yet   said trevize .   co ordinates in themselves aren t useful  unless you know the zero point and the conventions used in setting them up  the direction in which to mark off the distance  so to speak  what the equivalent of a prime meridian is  and so on .     how do you find out such things .   said pelorat blankly .    i obtained the co ordinates of terminus and a few other known points  relative to comporellon .  if i put them into the computer  it will calculate what the conventions must be for such co ordinates if terminus and the other points are to be correctly located .  i m only trying to organize things in my mind so that i can properly program the computer for this .  once the conventions are determined  the figures we have for the forbidden worlds might possibly have meaning .     only possibly .   said bliss .    only possibly  i m afraid   said trevize .   these are old figures after all presumably comporellian  but not definitely .  what if they are based on other conventions .     in that case .     in that case  we have only meaningless figures .  but we just have to find out .    his hands flickered over the softly glowing keys of the computer  feeding it the necessary information .  he then placed his hands on the handmarks on the desk .  he waited while the computer worked out the conventions of the known co ordinates  paused a moment  then interpreted the co ordinates of the nearest forbidden world by the same conventions  and finally located those co ordinates on the galactic map in its memory .   a starfield appeared on the screen and moved rapidly as it adjusted itself .  when it reached stasis  it expanded with stars bleeding off the edges in all directions until they were almost all gone .  at no point could the eye follow the rapid change  it was all a speckled blur .  until finally  a space one tenth of a parsec on each side  according to the index figures below the screen    all that remained .  there was no further change  and only half a dozen dial sparks relieved the darkness of the screen .    which one is the forbidden world .   asked pelorat softly .    none of them   said trevize .   four of them are red dwarfs  one a near red dwarf  and the last a white dwarf .  none of them can possibly have a habitable world in orbit about them .     how do you know they re red dwarfs just by looking at them .    trevize said   we re not looking at real stars  we re looking at a section of the galactic map stored in the computer s memory .  each one is labeled .  you can t see it and ordinarily i couldn t see it either  but as long as my hands are making contact  as they are  i am aware of a considerable amount of data on any star on which my eyes concentrate .    pelorat said in a woebegone tone   then the co ordinates are useless .    trevize looked up at him   no  janov .  i m not finished .  there s still the matter of time .  the co ordinates for the forbidden world are those of twenty thousand years ago .  in that time  both it and comporellon have been revolving about the galactic center  and they may well be revolving at different speeds and in orbits of different inclinations and eccentricities .  with time  therefore  the two worlds may be drifting closer together or farther apart and  in twenty thousand years  the forbidden world may have drifted anywhere from one half to five parsecs off the mark .  it certainly wouldn t be included in that tenth parsec square .     what do we do  then .     we have the computer move the galaxy twenty thousand years back in time relative to comporellon .     can it do that .   asked bliss  sounding rather awe struck .    well  it can t move the galaxy itself back in time  but it can move the map in its memory banks back in time .    bliss said   will we see anything happen .     watch   said trevize .   very slowly  the half dozen stars crawled over the face of the screen .  a new star  not hitherto on the screen  drifted in from the left hand edge  and pelorat pointed in excitement .   there .  there .    trevize said   sorry .  another red dwarf .  they re very common .  at least three fourths of all the stars in the galaxy are red dwarfs .    the screen settled down and stopped moving .    well .   said bliss .   trevize said   that s it .  that s the view of that portion of the galaxy as it would have been twenty thousand years ago .  at the very center of the screen is a point where the forbidden world ought to be if it had been drifting at some average velocity .     ought to be  but isn t   said bliss sharply .    it isn t   agreed trevize  with remarkably little emotion .   pelorat released his breath in a long sigh .   oh  too bad  golan .    trevize said   wait  don t despair .  i wasn t expecting to see the star there .     you weren t .   said pelorat  astonished .    no .  i told you that this isn t the galaxy itself  but the computer s map of the galaxy .  if a real star is not included in the map  we don t see it .  if the planet is called  forbidden  and has been called so for twenty thousand years  the chances are it wouldn t be included in the map .  and it isn t  for we don t see it .    bliss said   we might not see it because it doesn t exist .  the comporellian legends may be false  or the co ordinates may be wrong .     very true .  the computer  however  can now make an estimate as to what the co ordinates ought to be at this time  now that it has located the spot where it may have been twenty thousand years ago .  using the co ordinates corrected for time  a correction i could only have made through use of the star map  we can now switch to the real starfield of the galaxy itself .    bliss said   but you only assumed an average velocity for the forbidden world .  what if its velocity was not average .  you would not now have the correct co ordinates .     true enough  but a correction  assuming average velocity  is almost certain to be closer to its real position  than if we had made no time correction at all .     you hope .   said bliss doubtfully .    that s exactly what i do   said trevize .   i hope .   and now let s look at the real galaxy .    the two onlookers watched tensely  while trevize  perhaps to reduce his own tensions and delay the zero moment  spoke softly  almost as though he were lecturing .    it s more difficult to observe the real galaxy   he said .   the map in the computer is an artificial construction  with irrelevancies capable of being eliminated .  if there is a nebula obscuring the view  i can remove it .  if the angle of view is inconvenient for what i have in mind  i can change the angle  and so on .  the real galaxy  however  i must take as i find it  and if i want a change i must move physically through space  which will take far more time than it would take to adjust a map .    and as he spoke  the screen showed a star cloud so rich in individual stars as to seem an irregular heap of powder .   trevize said   that s a large angle view of a section of the milky way  and i want the foreground  of course .  if i expand the foreground  the background will tend to fade in comparison .  the co ordinate spot is close enough to comporellon so that i should be able to expand it to about the situation i had on the view of the map .  just let me put in the necessary instructions  if i can hold on to my sanity long enough .  now .     the starfield expanded with a rush so that thousands of stars pushed off every edge  giving the watchers so real a sensation of moving toward the screen that all three automatically leaned backward as though in response to a forward rush .   the old view returned  not quite as dark as it had been on the map  but with the half dozen stars shown as they had been in the original view .  and there  close to the center  was another star  shining far more brightly than the others .    there it is   said pelorat  in an awed whisper .    it may be .  i ll have the computer take its spectrum and analyze it .   there was a moderately long pause  then trevize said   spectral class  g    which makes it a trifle dimmer and smaller than terminus s sun  but rather brighter than comporellon s sun .  and no g class star should be omitted from the computer s galactic map .  since this one is  that is a strong indication that it may be the sun about which the forbidden world revolves .    bliss said   is there any chance of its turning out that there is no habitable planet revolving about this star after all .    there s a chance  i suppose .  in that case  we ll try to find the other two forbidden worlds .   bliss persevered .   and if the other two are false alarms  too .    then we ll try something else .    like what .    i wish i knew   said trevize grimly .     part three   aurora    chapter      forbidden world       .      golan   said pelorat .   does it bother you if i watch .     not at all  janov   said trevize .    if i ask questions .     go ahead .    pelorat said   what are you doing .    trevize took his eyes off the viewscreen .   i ve got to measure the distance of each star that seems to be near the forbidden world on the screen  so that i can determine how near they really are .  their gravitational fields must be known and for that i need mass and distance .  without that knowledge  one can t be sure of a clean jump .     how do you do that .     well  each star i see has its co ordinates in the computer s memory bank .  and these can be converted into co ordinates on the comporellian system .  that can  in turn  be slightly corrected for the actual position of the for star in space relative to co mporellon s sun  and that gives me the distance of each .  those red dwarfs all look quite near the forbidden world on the screen  but some might be much closer and some much farther .  we need their three dimensional position  you see .    pelorat nodded  and said   and you already have the co ordinates of the forbidden world     yes  but that s not enough .  i need the distances of the other stars to within a percent or so .  their gravitational intensity in the neighborhood of the forbidden world is so small that a slight error makes no perceptible difference .  the sun about which the forbidden world revolves or might revolve possesses an enormously intense gravitational field in the neighborhood of the forbidden world and i must know its distance with perhaps a thousand times the accuracy of that of the other stars .  the co ordinates alone won t do .     then what do you do .     i measure the apparent separation of the forbidden world or  rather  its star from three nearby stars which are so dim it takes considerable magnification to make them out at all .  presumably  those three are very far away .  we then keep one of those three stars centered on the screen and jump a tenth of a parsec in a direction at right angles to the line of vision to the forbidden world .  we can do that safely enough even without knowing distances to comparatively far off stars .    the reference star which is centered would still be centered after the jump .  the two other dim stars  if all three are truly very distant  do not change their positions measurably .  the forbidden world  however  is close enough to change its apparent position in parallactic shift .  from the size of the shift  we can determine its distance .  if i want to make doubly certain  i choose three other stars and try again .    pelorat said   how long does all that take .     not very long .  the computer does the heavy work .  i just tell it what to do .  what really takes the time is that i have to study the results and make sure they look right and that my instructions aren t at fault somehow .  if i were one of those daredevils with utter faith in themselves and the computer  it could all be done in a few minutes .    pelorat said   it s really astonishing .  think how much the computer does for us .     i think of it all the time .     what would you do without it .     what would i do without a gravitic ship .  what would i do without my astronautic training .  what would i do without twenty thousand years of hyperspatial technology behind me .  the fact is that i m myself here now .  suppose we were to imagine ourselves twenty thousand additional years into the future .  what technological marvels would we have to be grateful for .  or might it be that twenty thousand years hence humanity would not exist .     scarcely that   said pelorat .   scarcely not exist .  even if we don t become part of galaxia  we would still have psychohistory to guide us .    trevize turned in his chair  releasing his handhold on the computer .   let it work out distances   he said   and let it check the matter a number of times .  there s no hurry .    he looked quizzically at pelorat  and said   psychohistory .  you know  janov  twice that subject came up on comporellon  and twice it was described as a superstition .  i said so once  and then deniador said it also .  after all  how can you define psychohistory but as a superstition of the foundation .  isn t it a belief without proof or evidence .  what do you think  janov .  it s more your field than mine .    pelorat said   why do you say there s no evidence  golan .  the simulacrum of hari seldon has appeared in the time vault many times and has discussed events as they happened .  he could not have known what those events would be  in his time  had he not been able to predict them psychohistorically .    trevize nodded .   that sounds impressive .  he was wrong about the mule  but even allowing for that  it s impressive .  still  it has an uncomfortable magical feel to it .  any conjurer can do tricks .     no conjurer could predict centuries into the future .     no conjurer could really do what he makes you think he does .     come  golan .  i can t think of any trick that would allow me to predict what will happen five centuries from now .     nor can you think of a trick that will allow a conjurer to read the contents of a message hidden in a pseudo tesseract on an unmanned orbiting satellite .  just the same  i ve seen a conjurer do it .  has it ever occurred to you that the time capsule  along with the hari seldon simulacrum  may be rigged by the government .    pelorat looked as though he were revolted by the suggestion .   they wouldn t do that .    trevize made a scornful sound .   pelorat said   and they d be caught if they tried .     i m not at all sure of that .  the point is  though  that we don t know how psychohistory works at all .     i don t know how that computer works  but i know it works .     that s because others know how it works .  how would it be if no one knew how it worked .  then  if it stopped working for any reason  we would be helpless to do anything about it .  and if psychohistory suddenly stopped working     the second foundationers know the workings of psychohistory .     how do you know that  janov .     so it is said .     anything can be said .   ah  we have the distance of the forbidden world s star  and  i hope  very accurately .  let s consider the figures .    he stared at them for a long time  his lips moving occasionally  as though he were doing some rough calculations in his head .  finally  he said  without lifting his eyes   what s bliss doing .     sleeping  old chap   said pelorat .  then  defensively   she needs sleep  golan .  maintaining herself as part of gaia across hyperspace is energy consuming .     i suppose so   said trevize  and turned back to the computer .  he placed his hands on the desk and muttered   i ll let it go in several jumps and have it recheck each time .   then he withdrew them again and said   i m serious  janov .  what do you know about psychohistory .    pelorat looked taken aback .   nothing .  being a historian  which i am  after a fashion  is worlds different from being a psychohistorian .   of course  i know the two fundamental basics of psychohistory  but everyone knows that .     even i do .  the first requirement is that the number of human beings involved must be large enough to make statistical treatment valid .  but how large is  large enough  .    pelorat said   the latest estimate of the galactic population is something like ten quadrillion  and that s probably an underestimate .  surely  that s large enough .     how do you know .     because psychohistory does work  golan .  no matter how you chop logic  it does work .     and the second requirement   said trevize   is that human beings not be aware of psychohistory  so that the knowledge does not skew their reactions .   but they are aware of psychohistory .     only of its bare existence  old chap .  that s not what counts .  the second requirement is that human beings not be aware of the predictions of psychohistory and that they are not except that the second foundationers are supposed to be aware of them  but they re a special case .     and upon those two requirements alone  the science of psychohistory has been developed .  that s hard to believe .     not out of those two requirements alone    said pelorat .   there are advanced mathematics and elaborate statistical methods .  the story is  if you want tradition that hari seldon devised psychohistory by modeling it upon the kinetic theory of gases .  each atom or molecule in a gas moves randomly so that we can t know the position or velocity of any one of them .  nevertheless  using statistics  we can work out the rules governing their overall behavior with great precision .  in the same way  seldon intended to work out the overall behavior of human societies even though the solutions would not apply to the behavior of individual human beings .     perhaps  but human beings aren t atoms .     true   said pelorat .   a human being has consciousness and his behavior is sufficiently complicated to make it appear to be free will .  how seldon handled that i haven t any idea  and i m sure i couldn t understand it even if someone who knew tried to explain it to me but he did it .    trevize said   and the whole thing depends on dealing with people who are both numerous and unaware .  doesn t that seem to you a quicksandish foundation on which to build an enormous mathematical structure .  if those requirements are not truly met  then everything collapses .     but since the plan hasn t collapsed     or  if the requirements are not exactly false or inadequate but simply weaker than they should be  psychohistory might work adequately for centuries and then  upon reaching some particular crisis  would collapse  as it did temporarily in the time of the mule .   or what if there is a third requirement .     what third requirement .   asked pelorat  frowning slightly .    i don t know   said trevize .   an argument may seem thoroughly logical and elegant and yet contain unexpressed assumptions .  maybe the third requirement is an assumption so taken for granted that no one ever thinks of mentioning it .     an assumption that is so taken for granted is usually valid enough  or it wouldn t be so taken for granted .    trevize snorted .   if you knew scientific history as well as you know traditional history  janov  you would know how wrong that is .   but i see that we are now in the neighborhood of the sun of the forbidden world .    and  indeed  centered on the screen  was a bright star one so bright that the screen automatically filtered its light to the point where all other stars were washed out .      .   facilities for washing and for personal hygiene on board the far star were compact  and the use of water was always held to a reasonable minimum to avoid overloading the recycling facilities .  both pelorat and bliss had been sternly reminded of this by trevize .   even so  bliss maintained an air of freshness at all times and her dark  long hair could be counted on to be glossy  her fingernails to sparkle .   she walked into the pilot room and said   there you are .    trevize looked up and said   no need for surprise .  we could scarcely have left the ship  and a thirty second search would be bound to uncover us inside the ship  even if you couldn t detect our presence mentally .    bliss said   the expression was purely a form of greeting and not meant to be taken literally  as you well know .  where are we .   and don t say   in the pilot room .       bliss dear   said pelorat  holding out one arm   we re at the outer regions of the planetary system of the nearest of the three forbidden worlds .    she walked to his side  placing her hand lightly on his shoulder  while his arm moved about her waist .  she said   it can t be very forbidden .  nothing has stopped us .    trevize said   it is only forbidden because comporellon and the other worlds of the second wave of settlement have voluntarily placed the worlds of the first wave the spacers out of bounds .  if we ourselves don t feel bound by that voluntary agreement  what is to stop us .     the spacers  if any are left  might have voluntarily placed the worlds of the second wave out of bounds  too .  just because we don t mind intruding upon them doesn t mean that they don t mind it .     true   said trevize     if they exist .  but so far we don t even know if any planet exists for them to live on .  so far  all we see are the usual gas giants .  two of them  and not particularly large ones .    pelorat said hastily   but that doesn t mean the spacer world doesn t exist .  any habitable world would be much closer to the sun and much smaller and very hard to detect in the solar glare from this distance .  we ll have to microjump inward to detect such a planet .   he seemed rather proud to be speaking like a seasoned space traveler .    in that case   said bliss   why aren t we moving inward .     not just yet   said trevize .   i m having the computer check as far as it can for any sign of an artificial structure .  we ll move inward by stages a dozen  if necessary checking at each stage .  i don t want to be trapped this time as we were when we first approached gaia .  remember  janov .     traps like that could catch us every day .  the one at gaia brought me bliss .   pelorat gazed at her fondly .   trevize grinned .   are you hoping for a new bliss every day .    pelorat looked hurt  and bliss said  with a trace of annoyance   my good chap or whatever it is that pel insists on calling you you might as well move in more quickly .  while i am with you  you will not be trapped .     the power of gaia .     to detect the presence of other minds .  certainly .     are you sure you are strong enough  bliss .  i gather you must sleep quite a bit to regain strength expended at maintaining contact with the main body of gaia .  how far can i rely on the perhaps narrow limits of your abilities at this distance from the source .    bliss flushed .   the strength of the connection is ample .    trevize said   don t be offended .  i m simply asking .   don t you see this as a disadvantage of being gaia .  i am not gaia .  i am a complete and independent individual .  that means i can travel as far as i wish from my world and my people  and remain golan trevize .  what powers i have  and such as they are  i continue to have  and they remain wherever i go .  if i were alone in space  parsecs away from any human being  and unable  for some reason  to communicate with anyone in any way  or even to see the spark of a single star in the sky  i would be and remain golan trevize .  i might not be able to survive  and i might die  but i would die golan trevize .    bliss said   alone in space and far from all others  you would be unable to call on the help of your fellows  on their different talents and knowledge .  alone  as an isolated individual  you would be sadly diminished as compared with youself as part of an integrated society .  you know that .    trevize said   there would nevertheless not be the same diminution as in your case .  there is a bond between you and gaia that is far stronger than the one between me and my society  and that bond stretches through hyperspace and requires energy for maintenance  so that you must gasp  mentally  with the effort  and feel yourself to be a diminished entity far more than i must .    bliss s young face set hard and  for a moment  she looked young no more or  rather  she appeared ageless more gaia than bliss  as though to refute trevize s contention .  she said   even if everything you say is so  golan trevize that is  was  and will be  that cannot perhaps be less  but certainly cannot be more even if everything you say is so  do you expect there is no price to be paid for a benefit gained .  is it not better to be a warm blooded creature such as yourself than a cold blooded creature such as a fish  or whatever .    pelorat said   tortoises are cold blooded .  terminus doesn t have any  but some worlds do .  they are shelled creatures  very slow moving but long living .       well  then  isn t it better to be a human being than a tortoise  to move quickly whatever the temperature  rather than slowly .  isn t it better to support high energy activities  quickly contracting muscles  quickly working nerve fibers  intense and long sustained thought than to creep slowly  and sense gradually  and have only a blurred awareness of the immediate surroundings .  isn t it .     granted   said trevize .   it is .  what of it .     well  don t you know you must pay for warm bloodedness .  to maintain your temperature above that of your surroundings  you must expend energy far more wastefully than a tortoise must .  you must be eating almost constantly so that you can pour energy into your body as quickly as it leaks out .  you would starve far more quickly than a tortoise would  and die more quickly  too .  would you rather be a tortoise  and live more slowly and longer .  or would you rather pay the price and be a quick moving  quick sensing  thinking organism .     is this a true analogy  bliss .     no  trevize  for the situation with gaia is more favorable .  we don t expend unusual quantities of energy when we are compactly together .  it is only when part of gaia is at hyperspatial distances from the rest of gaia that energy expenditure rises .   and remember that what you have voted for is not merely a larger gaia  not just a larger individual world .  you have decided for galaxia  for a vast complex of worlds .  anywhere in the galaxy  you will be part of galaxia and you will be closely surrounded by parts of something that extends from each interstellar atom to the central black hole .  it would then require small amounts of energy to remain a whole .  no part would be at any great distance from all other parts .  it is all this you have decided for  trevize .  how can you doubt that you have chosen well .    trevize s head was bent in thought .  finally  he looked up and said   i may have chosen well  but i must be convinced of that .  the decision i have made it the most important in the history of humanity and it is not enough that it be a good one .  i must know it to be a good one .     what more do you need than what i have told you .     i don t know  but i will find it on earth .   he spoke with absolute conviction .   pelorat said   golan  the star shows a disc .    it did .  the computer  busy about its own affairs and not the least concerned with any discussion that might swirl about it  had been approaching the star in stages  and had reached the distance trevize had set for it .   they continued to be well outside the planetary plane and the computer split the screen to show each of three small inner planets .   it was the innermost that had a surface temperature in the liquid water range  and that had an oxygen atmosphere as well .  trevize waited for its orbit to be computed and the first crude estimate seemed reasonable .  he kept that computation going  for the longer the planetary movement was observed  the more accurate the computation of its orbital elements .   trevize said quite calmly   we have a habitable planet in view .  very likely habitable .     ah .   pelorat looked as nearly delighted as his solemn expression would allow .    i m afraid  though   said trevize   that there s no giant satellite .  in fact  no satellite of any kind has been detected so far .  so it isn t earth .  at least  not if we go by tradition .     don t worry about that  golan .   said pelorat .   i rather suspected we weren t going to encounter earth here when i saw that neither of the gas giants had an unusual ring system .     very well  then   said trevize .   the next step is to find out the nature of the life inhabiting it .  from the fact that it has an oxygen atmosphere  we can be absolutely certain that there is plant life upon it  but     animal life  too   said bliss abruptly .   and in quantity .     what .   trevize turned to her .    i can sense it .  only faintly at this distance  but the planet is unquestionably not only habitable  but inhabited .       .   the far star was in polar orbit about the forbidden world  at a distance great enough to keep the orbital period at a little in excess of six days .  trevize seemed in no hurry to come out of orbit .    since the planet is inhabited   he explained   and since  according to deniador  it was once inhabited by human beings who were technologically advanced and who represent a first wave of settlers the so called spacers they may be technologically advanced still and may have no great love for us of the second wave who have replaced them .  i would like them to show themselves  so that we can learn a little about them before risking a landing .     they may not know we are here   said pelorat .    we would  if the situation were reversed .  i must assume  then  that  if they exist  they are likely to try to make contact with us .  they might even want to come out and get us .     but if they did come out after us and were technologically advanced  we might be helpless to     i can t believe that   said trevize .   technological advancement is not necessarily all one piece .  they might conceivably be far beyond us in some ways  but it s clear they don t indulge in interstellar travel .  it is we  not they  who have settled the galaxy  and in all the history of the empire  i know of nothing that would indicate that they left their worlds and made themselves evident to us .  if they haven t been space traveling  how could they be expected to have made serious advances in astronautics .  and if they haven t  they can t possibly have anything like a gravitic ship .  we may be essentially unarmed but even if they come lumbering after us with a battleship  they couldn t possibly catch us .   no  we wouldn t be helpless .     their advance may be in mentalics .  it may be that the mule was a spacer    trevize shrugged in clear irritation .   the mule can t be everything .  the gaians have described him as an aberrant gaian .  he s also been considered a random mutant .    pelorat said   to be sure  there have also been speculations not taken very seriously  of course that he was a mechanical artifact .  a robot  in other words  though that word wasn t used .     if there is something that seems mentally dangerous  we will have to depend on bliss to neutralize that .  she can  is she asleep now  by the way .     she has been   said pelorat   but she was stirring when i came out here .     stirring  was she .  well  she ll have to be awake on short notice if anything starts happening .  you ll have to see to that  janov .     yes  golan   said pelorat quietly .   trevize shifted his attention to the computer .   one thing that bothers m  are the entry stations .  ordinarily  they are a sure sign of a planet inhabited by human beings with a high technology .  but these     is there something wrong with them .     several things .  in the first place  they re very archaic .  they might be thousands of years old .  in the second  there s no radiation but thermals .     what are thermals .     thermal radiation is given off by any object warmer than its surroundings .  it s a familiar signature that everything yields and it consists of a broad band of radiation following a fixed pattern depending on temperature .  that is what the entry stations are radiating .  if there are working human devices aboard the stations  there is bound to be a leakage of nonthermal  nonrandom radiation .  since only thermals are present we can assume that either the stations are empty  and have been  perhaps  for thousands of years  or  if occupied  it is by people with a technology so advanced in this direction that they leak no radiation .     perhaps   said pelorat   the planet has a high civilization  but the entry stations are empty because the planet has been left so strictly alone for so long by our kind of settlers that they are no longer concerned about any approach .     perhaps .    or perhaps it is a lure of some sort .    bliss entered  and trevize  noting her out of the corner of his eyes  said grumpily   yes  here we are .     so i see   said bliss   and still in an unchanged orbit .  i can tell that much .    pelorat explained hastily .   golan is being cautious  dear .  the entry stations seem unoccupied and we re not sure of the significance of that .     there s no need to worry about it   said bliss indifferently .   there are no detectable signs of intelligent life on the planet we re orbiting .    trevize bent an astonished glare at her .   what are you talking about .  you said     i said there was animal life on the planet  and so there is  but where in the galaxy were you taught that animal life necessarily implies human life .     why didn t you say this when you first detected animal life .     because at that distance  i couldn t tell .  i could barely detect the unmistakable wash of animal neural activity  but there was no way i could  at that intensity  tell butterflies from human beings .     and now .     we re much closer now  and you may have thought i was asleep  but i wasn t or  at least  only briefly .  i was  to use an inappropriate word  listening as hard as i could for any sign of mental activity complex enough to signify the presence of intelligence .     and there isn t any .     i would suppose   said bliss  with sudden caution   that if i detect nothing at this distance  there can t possibly be more than a few thousand human beings on the planet .  if we come closer  i can judge it still more delicately .     well  that changes things   said trevize  with some confusion .    i suppose   said bliss  who looked distinctly sleepy and  therefore  irritable .   you can now discard all this business of analyzing radiation and inferring and deducing and who knows what else you may have been doing .  my gaian senses do the job much more efficiently and surely .  perhaps you see what i mean when i say it is better to be a gaian than an isolate .    trevize waited before answering  clearly laboring to hold his temper .  when he spoke  it was with a polite  and almost formal tone   i am grateful to you for the information .  nevertheless  you must understand that  to use an analogy  the thought of the advantage of improving my sense of smell would be insufficient motive for me to decide to abandon my humanity and become a bloodhound .       .   they could see the forbidden world now  as they moved below the cloud layer and drifted through the atmosphere .  it looked curiously moth eaten .   the polar regions were icy  as might be expected  but they were not large in extent .  the mountainous regions were barren  with occasional glaciers  but they were not large in extent  either .  there were small desert areas  well scattered .   putting all that aside  the planet was  in potential  beautiful .  its continental areas were quite large  but sinuous  so that there were long shorelines  and rich coastal plains of generous extent .  there were lush tracts of both tropical and temperate forests  rimmed by grasslands and yet the moth eaten nature of it all was evident .   scattered through the forests were semibarren areas  and parts of the grasslands were thin and sparse .    some sort of plant disease .   said pelorat wonderingly .    no   said bliss slowly .   something worse than that  and more permanent .     i ve seen a number of worlds   said trevize   but nothing like this .     i have seen very few worlds   said bliss   but i think the thoughts of gaia and this is what you might expect of a world from which humanity has disappeared .     why .   said trevize .    think about it   said bliss tartly .   no inhabited world has a true ecological balance .  earth must have had one originally  for if that was the world on which humanity evolved  there must have been long ages when humanity did not exist  or any species capable of developing an advanced technology and the ability to modify the environment .  in that case  a natural balance  everchanging  of course must have existed .  on all other inhabited worlds  however  human beings have carefully terraformed their new environments and established plant and animal life  but the ecological system they introduce is bound to be unbalanced .  it would possess only a limited number of species and only those that human beings wanted  or couldn t help introducing    pelorat said   you know what that reminds me of .   pardon me  bliss  for interrupting  but it so fits that i can t resist telling you right now before i forget .  there s an old creation myth i once came across  a myth in which life was formed on a planet and consisted of only a limited assortment of species  just those useful to or pleasant for humanity .  the first human beings then did something silly never mind what  old fellow  because those old myths are usually symbolic and only confusing if they are taken literally and the planet s soil was cursed .   thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee   is the way the curse was quoted though the passage sounds much better in the archaic galactic in which it was written .  the point is  though  was it really a curse .  things human beings don t like and don t want  such as thorns and thistles  may be needed to balance the ecology .    bliss smiled .   it s really amazing  pel  how everything reminds you of a legend  and how illuminating they are sometimes .  human beings  in terraforming a world  leave out the thorns and thistles  whatever they may be  and human beings then have to labor to keep the world going .  it isn t a self supporting organism as gaia is .  it is rather a miscellaneous collection of isolates and the collection isn t miscellaneous enough to allow the ecological balance to persist indefinitely .  if humanity disappears  and if its guiding hands are removed  the world s pattern of life inevitably begins to fall apart .  the planet unterraforms itself .    trevize said skeptically   if that s what s happening  it doesn t happen quickly .  this world may have been free of human beings for twenty thousand years and yet most of it still seems to be very much a going concern .     surely   said bliss   that depends on how well the ecological balance was set up in the first place .  if it is a fairly good balance to begin with  it might last for a long time without human beings .  after all  twenty thousand years  though very long in terms of human affairs  is just overnight when compared to a planetary lifetime .     i suppose   said pelorat  staring intently at the planetary vista   that if the planet is degenerating  we can be sure that the human beings are gone .    bliss said   i still detect no mental activity at the human level and i am willing to suppose that the planet is safely free of humanity .  there is the steady hum and buzz of lower levels of consciousness  however  levels high enough to represent birds and mammals .  just the same  i m not sure that unterraforming is enough to show human beings are gone .  a planet might deteriorate even if human beings existed upon it  if the society were itself abnormal and did not understand the importance of preserving the environment .     surely   said pelorat   such a society would quickly be destroyed .  i don t think it would be possible for human beings to fail to understand the importance of retaining the very factors that are keeping them alive .    bliss said   i don t have your pleasant faith in human reason  pel .  it seems to me to be quite conceivable that when a planetary society consists only of isolates  local and even individual concerns might easily be allowed to overcome planetary concerns .     i don t think that s conceivable   said trevize   anymore than pelorat does .  in fact  since human occupied worlds exist by the million and none of them have deteriorated in an unterraforming fashion  your fear of isolatism may be exaggerated  bliss .    the ship now moved out of the daylit hemisphere into the night .  the effect was that of a rapidly deepening twilight  and then utter darkness outside  except for starlight where the sky was clear .   the ship maintained its height by accurately monitoring the atmospheric pressure and gravitational intensity .  they were at a height too great to encounter any upthrusting mountainous massif  for the planet was at a stage when mountain building had not recently taken place .  still  the computer felt its way forward with its microwave finger tips  just in case .   trevize regarded the velvety darkness and said  thoughtfully   somehow what i find most convincing as the sign of a deserted planet is the absence of visible light on the dark side .  no technological society could possibly endure darkness .   as soon as we get into the dayside  we ll go lower .     what would be the use of that .   said pelorat .   there s nothing there .     who said there s nothing there .     bliss did .  and you did .     no  janov .  i said there s no radiation of technological origin and bliss said there s no sign of human mental activity  but that doesn t mean there s nothing there .  even if there are no human beings on the planet  there would surely be relics of some sort .  i m after information  janov  and the remainders of a technology may have its uses in that direction .     after twenty thousand years .   pelorat s voice climbed in pitch .   what do you think can survive twenty thousand years .  there will be no films  no paper  no print  metal will have rusted  wood will have decayed  plastic will be in shattered grains .  even stone will have crumbled and eroded .     it may not be twenty thousand years   said trevize patiently .   i mentioned that time as the longest period the planet may have been left empty of human beings because comporellian legend has this world flourishing at that time .  but suppose the last human beings had died or vanished or fled only a thousand years ago .    they arrived at the other end of the nightside and the dawn came and brightened into sunlight almost instantaneously .   the far star sank downward and slowed its progress until the details of the land surface were clearly visible .  the small islands that dotted the continental shores could now be clearly seen .  most were green with vegetation .   trevize said   it s my idea that we ought to study the spoiled areas particularly .  it seems to me that those places where human beings were most concentrated would be where the ecological balance was most lacking .  those areas might be the nucleus of the spreading blight of unterraforming .  what do you think  bliss .     it s possible .  in any case  in the absence of definite knowledge  we might as well look where it s easiest to see .  the grasslands and forest would have swallowed most signs of human habitation so that looking there might prove a waste of time .     it strikes me   said pelorat   that a world might eventually establish a balance with what it has  that new species might develop  and that the bad areas might be recolonized on a new basis .     possibly  pel   said bliss .   it depends on how badly out of balance the world was in the first place .  and for a world to heal itself and achieve a new balance through evolution would take far more than twenty thousand years .  we d be talking millions of years .    the far star was no longer circling the world .  it was drifting slowly across a five hundred kilometer wide stretch of scattered heath and furze  with occasional clumps of trees .    what do you think of that .   said trevize suddenly  pointing .  the ship came to a drifting halt and hovered in mid air .  there was a low  but persistent  hum as the gravitic engines shifted into high  neutralizing the planetary gravitational field almost entirely .   there was nothing much to see where trevize pointed .  tumbled mounds bearing soil and sparse grass were all that was visible .    it doesn t look like anything to me   said pelorat .    there s a straight line arrangement to that junk .  parallel lines  and you can make out some faint lines at right angles  too .  see .  see .  you can t get that in any natural formation .  that s human architecture  marking out foundations and walls  just as clearly as though they were still standing there to be looked at .     suppose it is   said pelorat .   that s just a ruin .  if we re going to do archeological research  we re going to have to dig and dig .  professionals would take years to do it properly     yes  but we can t take the time to do it properly .  that may be the faint outline of an ancient city and something of it may still be standing .  let s follow those lines and see where they take us .    it was toward one end of the area  at a place where the trees were somewhat more thickly clumped  that they came to standing walls or partially standing ones .   trevize said   good enough for a beginning .  we re landing .      chapter      facing the pack       .     the far star came to rest at the bottom of a small rise  a hill in the generally fiat countryside .  almost without thought  trevize had taken it for granted that it would be best for the ship not to be visible for miles in every direction .   he said   the temperature outside is    c .   the wind is about eleven kilometers per hour from the west  and it is partly cloudy .  the computer does not know enough about the general air circulation to be able to predict the weather .  however  since the humidity is some forty percent  it seems scarcely about to rain .  on the whole  we seem to have chosen a comfortable latitude or season of the year  and after comporellon that s a pleasure .     i suppose   said pelorat   that as the planet continues to unterraform  the weather will become more extreme .     i m sure of that   said bliss .    be as sure as you like   said trevize .   we have thousands of years of leeway .  right now  it s still a pleasant planet and will continue to be so for our lifetimes and far beyond .    he was clasping a broad belt about his waist as he spoke  and bliss said sharply   what s that  trevize .     just my old navy training   said trevize .   i m not going into an unknown world unarmed .     are you seriously intending to carry weapons .     absolutely .  here on my right  he slapped a holster that contained a massive weapon with a broad muzzle  is my blaster  and here on my left    a smaller weapon with a thin muzzle that contained no opening  is my neuronic whip .     two varieties of murder   said bliss  with distaste .    only one .  the blaster kills .  the neuronic whip doesn t .  it just stimulates the pain nerves  and it hurts so that you can wish you were dead  i m told .  fortunately  i ve never been at the wrong end of one .     why are you taking them .     i told you .  it s an enemy world .     trevize  it s an empty world .     is it .  there s no technological society  it would seem  but what if there are post technological primitives .  they may not possess anything worse than clubs or rocks  but those can kill  too .    bliss looked exasperated  but lowered her voice in an effort to be reasonable .   i detect no human neuronic activity  trevize .  that eliminates primitives of any type  post technological or otherwise .     then i won t have to use my weapons   said trevize .   still  what harm would there be in carrying them .  they ll just make me a little heavier  and since the gravitational pull at the surface is about ninety one percent that of terminus  i can afford the weight .   listen  the ship may be unarmed as a ship  but it has a reasonable supply of hand weapons .  i suggest that you two also     no   said bliss at once .   i will not make even a gesture in the direction of killing or of inflicting pain  either .     it s not a question of killing  but of avoiding being killed  if you see what i mean .     i can protect myself in my own way .     janov .    pelorat hesitated .   we didn t have arms on comporellon .     come  janov  comporellon was a known quantity  a world associated with the foundation .  besides we were at once taken into custody .  if we had had weapons  they would have been taken away .  do you want a blaster .    pelorat shook his head .   i ve never been in the navy  old chap .  i wouldn t know how to use one of those things and  in an emergency  i would never think of it in time .  i d just run and and get killed .     you won t get killed  pel   said bliss energetically .   gaia has you in my our its protection  and that posturing naval hero as well .    trevize said   good .  i have no objection to being protected  but i am not posturing .  i am simply making assurance doubly sure  and if i never have to make a move toward these things  i ll be completely pleased  i promise you .  still i must have them .    he patted both weapons affectionately and said   now let s step out on this world which may not have felt the weight of human beings upon its surface for thousands of years .       .    i have a feeling   said pelorat   that it must be rather late in the day  but the sun is high enough to make it near noon  perhaps .     i suspect   said trevize  looking about the quiet panorama   that your feeling originates out of the sun s orange tint  which gives it a sunset feel .  if we re still here at actual sunset and the cloud formations are proper  we ought to experience a deeper red than we re used to .  i don t know whether you ll find it beautiful or depressing .   for that matter it was probably even more extreme on comporellon  but there we were indoors virtually all the time .    he turned slowly  considering the surroundings in all directions .  in addition to the almost subliminal oddness of the light  there was the distinctive smell of the world or this section of it .  it seemed a little musty  but far from actively unpleasant .   the trees nearby were of middling height  and looked old  with gnarled bark and trunks a little off the vertical  though because of a prevailing wind or something off color about the soil he couldn t tell .  was it the trees that lent a somehow menacing ambience to the world or was it something else less material .   bliss said   what do you intend to do  trevize .  surely we didn t come all this distance to enjoy the view .    trevize said   actually  perhaps that ought to be my part of it just now .  i would suggest that janov explore this place .  there are ruins off in that direction and he s the one who can judge the value of any records he might find .  i imagine he can understand writings or films in archaic galactic and i know quite well i wouldn t .  and i suppose  bliss  you want to go with him in order to protect him .  as for me  i will stay here as a guard on the outer rim .     a guard against what .  primitives with rocks and clubs .     perhaps .   and then the smile that had hovered about his lips faded and he said   oddly enough  bliss  i m a little uneasy about this place .  i can t say why .    pelorat said   come  bliss .  i ve been a home body collector of old tales all my life  so i ve never actually put my hands on ancient documents .  just imagine if we could find    trevize watched them walk away  pelorat s voice fading as he walked eagerly toward the ruins  bliss swinging along at his side .   trevize listened absently and then turned back to continue his study of the surroundings .  what could there be to rouse apprehension .   he had never actually set foot upon a world without a human population  but he had viewed many from space .  usually  they were small worlds  not large enough to hold either water or air  but they had been useful as marking a meeting site during naval maneuvers  there had been no war in his lifetime  or for a century before his birth but maneuvers went on   or as an exercise in simulated emergency repairs .  ships he had been on had been in orbit about such worlds  or had even rested on them  but he had never had occasion to step off the ships at those times .   was it that he was now actually standing on an empty world .  would he have felt the same if he had been standing on one of the many small  airless worlds he had encountered in his student days and even since .   he shook his head .  it wouldn t have bothered him .  he was sure of that .  he would have been in a space suit  as he had been innumerable times when he was free of his ship in space .  it was a familiar situation and contact with a mere lump of rock would have produced no alteration in the familiarity .  surely .   of course  he was not wearing a space suit now .   he was standing on a habitable world  as comfortable to the feel as terminus would be far more comfortable than comporellon had been .  he experienced the wind against his cheek  the warmth of the sun on his back  the rustle of vegetation in his ears .  everything was familiar  except that there were no human beings on it at least  not any longer .   was that it .  was it that that made the world seem so eerie .  was it that it was not merely an uninhabited world  but a deserted one .   he had never been on a deserted world before  never heard of a deserted world before  never thought a world could be deserted .  all the worlds he had known of till now  once they had been populated by human beings  remained so populated forever .   he looked up toward the sky .  nothing else had deserted it .  an occasional bird flew across his line of vision  seeming more natural  somehow  than the slate blue sky between the orange tinted fair weather clouds .   trevize was certain that  given a few days on the planet  he would become accustomed to the off color so that sky and clouds would grow to seem normal to him .        he heard birdsongs from the trees  and the softer noise of insects .  bliss had mentioned butterflies earlier and here they were in surprising numbers and in several colorful varieties .   there were also occasional rustlings in the clumps of grass that surrounded the trees  but he could not quite make out what was causing them .   nor did the obvious presence of life in his vicinity rouse fear in him .  as bliss had said  terraformed worlds had  from the very first  lacked dangerous animals .  the fairy tales of childhood  and the heroic fantasies of his teenage years were invariably set on a legendary world that must have been derived from the vague myths of earth .  the hyperdrama holoscreen had been filled with monsters lions  unicorns  dragons  whales  brontosaurs  bears .  there were dozens of them with names he could not remember  some of them surely mythical  and perhaps all of them .  there were smaller animals that bit and stung  even plants that were fearful to the touch but only in fiction .  he had once heard that primitive honeybees were able to sting  but certainly no red bees were in any way harmful .   slowly  he walked to the right  skirting the border of the hill .  the grass was tall and rank  but sparse  growing in clumps .  he made his way among the trees  also growing in clumps .   then he yawned .  certainly  nothing exciting was happening  and he wondered if he might not retreat to the ship and take a nap .  no  unthinkable .  clearly  he had to stand on guard .   perhaps he ought to do sentry duty marching  one  two  one two  swinging about with a snap and performing complicated maneuverings with a parade electro rod .   it was a weapon no warrior had used in three centuries  but it was still absolutely essential at drill  for no reason anyone could ever advance .    he grinned at the thought of it  then wondered if he ought to join pelorat and bliss in the ruins .  why .  what good would he do .   suppose he saw something that pelorat had happened to overlook .   well  time enough to make the attempt after pelorat returned .  if there was anything that might be found easily  by all means let pelorat make the discovery .   might the two be in trouble .  foolish .  what possible kind of trouble .   and if there were trouble  they would call out .   he stopped to listen .  he heard nothing .   and then the irresistible thought of sentry duty recurred to him and h  found himself marching  feet moving up and down with a stamp  an imaginary electro rod coming off one shoulder  whirling  and being held out straight before him  exactly vertical whirling again  end over end  and back over the other shoulder .  then  with a smart about face  he was looking toward the ship  rather far off now  once more .   and when he did that  he froze in reality  and not in sentry make believe .   he was not alone .   until then  he had not seen any living creature other than plant growl insects  and an occasional bird .  he had neither seen nor heard anything approach but now an animal stood between him and the ship .   sheer surprise at the unexpected event deprived him  for a moment  of the ability to interpret what he saw .  it was not till after a perceptible interval that he knew what he was looking at .   it was only a dog .   trevize was not a dog person .  he had never owned a dog and he felt no surge of friendliness toward one when he encountered it .  he felt no such surge this time  either .  he thought  rather impatiently  that there was no world on which these creatures had not accompanied men .  they existed in countless varieties and trevize had long had the weary impression that each world had at least one variety characteristic of itself .  nevertheless  all varieties were constant in this  whether they were kept for entertainment  show  or some form of useful work they were bred to love and trust human beings .   it was a love and trust trevize had never appreciated .  he had once lived with a woman who had had a dog .  that dog  whom trevize tolerated for the sake of the woman  conceived a deep seated adoration for him  followed him about  leaned against him when relaxing  all fifty pounds of him   covered him with saliva and hair at unexpected moments  and squatted outside the door and moaned whenever he and the woman were trying to engage in sex .   from that experience  trevize had emerged with the firm conviction that for some reason known only to the canine mind and its odor analyzing ability  he was a fixed object of doggish devotion .   therefore  once the initial surprise was over  he surveyed the dog without concern .  it was a large dog  lean and rangy  and with long legs .  it was staring at him with no obvious sign of adoration .  its mouth was open in what might have been taken as a welcoming grin  but the teeth displayed were somehow large and dangerous  and trevize decided that he would be more comfortable without the dog in his line of view .   it occurred to him  then  that the dog had never seen a human being  and that countless canine generations preceding had never seen one .  the dog might have been as astonished and uncertain at the sudden appearance of a human being as trevize had been at that of the dog .  trevize  at least  had quickly recognized the dog for what it was  but the dog did not have that advantage .  it was still puzzled  and perhaps alarmed .   clearly  it would not be safe to leave an animal that large  and with such teeth  in an alarmed state .  trevize realized that it would be necessary to establish a friendship at once .   very slowly  he approached the dog  no sudden motions  of course  .  he held out his hand  ready to allow it to be sniffed  and made soft  soothing sounds  most of which consisted of  nice doggy  something he found intensely embarrassing .   the dog  eyes fixed on trevize  backed away a step or two  as though in distrust  and then its upper lip wrinkled into a snarl and from its mouth there issued a rasping growl .  although trevize had never seen a dog behave so  there was no way of interpreting the action as representing anything but menace .   trevize therefore stopped advancing and froze .  his eyes caught motion to one side  and his head turned slowly .  there were two other dogs advancing from that direction .  they looked just as deadly as the first .   deadly .  that adjective occurred to him only now  and its dreadful appropriateness was unmistakable .   his heart was suddenly pounding .  the way to the ship was blocked .  he could not run aimlessly  for those long canine legs would reach him in yards .  if he stood his ground and used his blaster  then while he killed one  the other two would be upon him .  off in the distance  he could see other dogs approaching .  was there some way in which they communicated .  did they hunt in packs .   slowly  he shifted ground leftward  in a direction in which there were no dogs as yet .  slowly .  slowly .   the dogs shifted ground with him .  he felt certain that all that saved him from instant attack was the fact that the dogs had never seen or smelled anything like himself before .  they had no established behavior pattern they could follow in his case .   if he ran  of course  that would represent something familiar to the dogs .  they would know what to do if something the size of trevize showed fear and ran .  they would run  too .  faster .   trevize kept sidling toward a tree .  he had the wildest desire to move upward where the dogs could not follow .  they moved with him  snarling softly  coming closer .  all three had their eyes fixed unwinkingly upon him .  two more were joining them and  farther off  trevize could see still other j dogs approaching .  at some point  when he was close enough  he would have to make the dash .  he could not wait too long  or run too soon .  either might be fatal .   now .   he probably set a personal record for acceleration and even so it was a near thing .  he felt the snap of jaws close on the heel of one foot  and for just moment he was held fast before the teeth slid off the tough ceramoid .   he was not skilled at climbing trees .  he had not climbed one since he was ten and  as he recalled  that had been a clumsy effort .  in this case  though  the trunk was not quite vertical  and the bark was gnarled and offered handholds .  what was more  he was driven by necessity  and it is remarkable what one can do if the need is great enough .   trevize found himself sitting in a crotch  perhaps ten meters above ground .  for the moment he was totally unaware that he had scraped hand and that it was oozing blood .  at the base of the tree  five dogs now on their haunches  staring upward  tongues lolling  all looking patiently expectant .   what now .      .   trevize was not in a position to think about the situation in logical detail .  rather  he experienced flashes of thought in odd and distorted sequence which  if he had eventually sorted them out  would have come to this    bliss had earlier maintained that in terraforming a planet  human map would establish an unbalanced economy  which they would be able to keep from falling apart only by unending effort .  for instance  no settlers had brought with them any of the large predators .  small ones could not be helped .  insects  parasites even small hawks  shrews  and so on .   those dramatic animals of legend and vague literary accounts tigers  grizzly bears  orcs  crocodiles .  who would carry them from world to world even if there were sense to it .  and where would there be sense to it .   it meant that human beings were the only large predators  and it was up to them to cull those plants and animals that  left to themselves  would smother in their own overplenty .   and if human beings somehow vanished  then other predators must take their place .  but what predators .  the most sizable predators tolerated by human beings were dogs and cats  tamed and living on human bounty .   what if no human beings remained to feed them .  they must then find their own food for their survival and  in all truth  for the survival of those they preyed on  whose numbers had to be kept in check lest overpopulation do a hundred times the damage that predations would do .   so dogs would multiply  in their variations  with the large ones attacking the large  untended herbivores  the smaller ones preying on birds and rodents .  cats would prey by night as dogs did by day  the former singly  the latter in packs .   and perhaps evolution would eventually produce more varieties  to fill additional environmental niches .  would some dogs eventually develop seagoing characteristics to enable them to live on fish  and would some cats develop gliding abilities to hunt the clumsier birds in the air as well as on the ground .   in flashes  all this came to trevize while he struggled with more systematic thought to tell him what he might do .   the number of dogs kept growing .  he counted twenty three now surrounding the tree and there were others approaching .  how large was the pack .  what did it matter .  it was large enough already .   he withdrew his blaster from its holster  but the solid feel of the butt in his hand did not give him the sense of security he would have liked .  when had he last inserted an energy unit into it and how many charges could he fire .  surely not twenty three .   what about pelorat and bliss .  if they emerged  would the dogs turn on them .  were they safe even if they did not emerge .  if the dogs sensed the presence of two human beings inside the ruins  what could stop them from attacking them there .  surely there would be no doors or barriers to hold them off .   could bliss stop them  and even drive them away .  could she concentrate her powers through hyperspace to the desired pitch of intensity .  for how long could she maintain them .   should he call for help then .  would they come running if he yelled  and would the dogs flee under bliss s glare .   would it take a glare or was it simply a mental action undetectable to onlookers without the ability .   or  if they appeared  would they then be torn apart under the eyes of trevize  who would be forced to watch  helplessly  from the relative safety of his post in the tree .   no  he would have to use his blaster .  if he could kill one dog and frighten them off for just a while  he could scramble down the tree  yell for pelorat and bliss  kill a second dog if they showed signs of returning  and all three could then hustle into the ship .   he adjusted the intensity of the microwave beam to the three quartet mark .  that should be ample to kill a dog with a loud report .  the report would serve to frighten the dogs away  and he would be conserving energy .   he aimed carefully at a dog in the middle of the pack  one who seemed  in trevize s own imagination  at least  to exude a greater malignancy than the rest perhaps only because he sat more quietly and  therefore  seemed more cold bloodedly intent on his prey .  the dog was staring directly at the weapon now  as though it scorned the worst trevize could do .   it occurred to trevize that he had never himself fired a blaster at a human being  or seen anyone else do it .  there had been firing at water filled dummies of leather and plastic during training  with the water almost instantaneously heated to the boiling point  and shredding the covering as it exploded .   but who  in the absence of war  would fire at a human being .  and what human being would withstand a blaster and force its use .  only here  on  world made pathological by the disappearance of human beings   with that odd ability of the brain to note something utterly beside the point  trevize was aware of the fact that a cloud had hidden the sun and then he fired .   there was an odd shimmer of the atmosphere on a straight line from the muzzle of the blaster to the dog  a vague sparkle that might have gone unnoticed if the sun were still shining unhindered .   the dog must have felt the initial surge of heat  and made the smallest motion as though it were about to leap .  and then it exploded  as a portion its blood and cellular contents vaporized .   the explosion made a disappointingly small noise  for the dog s integument was simply not as tough as that of the dummies they had practiced on .  flesh  skin  blood  and bone were scattered  however  and trevize felt his stomach heave .   the dogs started back  some having been bombarded with uncomfortably warm fragments .  that was only a momentary hesitation  however .  they crowded against each other suddenly  in order to eat what had been provided .  trevize felt his sickness increase .  he was not frightening them  he was feeding them .  at that rate  they would never leave .  in fact  the smell of fresh blood and warm meat would attract still more dogs  and perhaps other smaller predators as well .   a voice called out   trevize .  what     trevize looked outward .  bliss and pelorat had emerged from the ruins .  bliss had stopped short  her arms thrown out to keep pelorat back .  she stared at the dogs .  the situation was obvious and clear .  she had to ask nothing .   trevize shouted   i tried to drive them off without involving you and janov .  can you hold them off .     barely   said bliss  not shouting  so that trevize had trouble hearing her even though the dogs  snarling had quieted as though a soothing soundabsorbent blanket had been thrown over them .   bliss said   there are too many of them  and i am not familiar with their pattern of neuronic activity .  we have no such savage things on gaia .     or on terminus .  or on any civilized world   shouted trevize .   i ll shoot as many of them as i can and you try to handle the rest .  a smaller number will give you less trouble .     no  trevize .  shooting them will just attract others .   stay behind me  pel .  there s no way you can protect me .   trevize  your other weapon .     the neuronic whip .     yes .  that produces pain .  low power .  low power .     are you afraid of hurting them .   called out trevize in anger .   is this a time to consider the sacredness of life .     i m considering pel s .  also mine .  do as i say .  low power  and shoot at one of the dogs .  i can t hold them much longer .    the dogs had drifted away from the tree and had surrounded bliss and pelorat  who stood with their backs to a crumbling wall .  the dogs nearest the two made hesitant attempts to come closer still  whining a bit as though trying to puzzle out what it was that held them off when they could sense nothing that would do it .  some tried uselessly to scramble up the wall and attack from behind .   trevize s hand was trembling as he adjusted the neuronic whip to low power .  the neuronic whip used much less energy than the blaster did  and a single power cartridge could produce hundreds of whip like strokes but  come to think of it  he didn t remember when he had last charged this weapon  either .   it was not so important to aim the whip .  since conserving energy was not as critical  he could use it in a sweep across the mass of dogs .  that was the traditional method of controlling crowds that showed signs of turning dangerous .   however  he followed bliss s suggestion .  he aimed at one dog and fired .  the dog fell over  its legs twitching .  it emitted loud  high pitched squeals .   the other dogs backed away from the stricken beast  ears flattening backward against their heads .  then  squealing in their turn  they turned and left  at first slowly  then more rapidly  and finally  at a full race .  the dog who had been hit  scrambled painfully to its legs  and limped away whimpering  much the last of them .   the noise vanished in the distance  and bliss said   we had better get into the ship .  they will come back .  or others will .    trevize thought that never before had he manipulated the ship s entry mechanism so rapidly .  and it was possible he might never do so again .      .   night had fallen before trevize felt something approaching the normal .  the  small patch of syntho skin on the scrape on his hand had soothed the physical pain  but there was a scrape on his psyche for which soothing was not so easy .  it was not the mere exposure to danger .  he could react to that as well as any ordinarily brave person might .  it was the totally unlooked for direction from which the danger had come .  it was the feeling of the ridiculous .  how would it look if people were to find out he had been treed by snarling dogs .  it would scarcely be worse if he had been put to flight by the whirring of angry canaries .   for hours  he kept listening for a new attack on the part of the dogs  for ths  sound of howls  for the scratch of claws against the outer hull .   pelorat  by comparison  seemed quite cool .   there was no question in my mind  old chap  that bliss would handle it  but i must say you fired the weapon well .    trevize shrugged .  he was in no mood to discuss the matter .   pelorat was holding his library the one compact disc on which his lifetime of research into myths and legends were stored and with it he retreated into his bedroom where he kept his small reader .   he seemed quite pleased with himself .  trevize noticed that but didn t follow it up .  time for that later when his mind wasn t quite as taken up with dogs .   bliss said  rather tentatively  when the two were alone   i presume you were taken by surprise .     quite   said trevize gloomily .   who would think that at the sight of a dog a dog i should run for my life .     twenty thousand years without men and it would not be quite a dog .  those beasts must now be the dominant large predators .    trevize nodded .   i figured that out while i was sitting on the tree bramb being a dominated prey .  you were certainly right about an unbalanced ecology .     unbalanced  certainly  from the human standpoint but considering how efficiently the dogs seem to be going about their business  i wonder if pel may be right in his suggestion that the ecology could balance itself  with various environmental niches being filled by evolving variations of the relatively few species that were once brought to the world .     oddly enough   said trevize   the same thought occurred to me .     provided  of course  the unbalance is not so great that the process of righting itself takes too long .  the planet might become completely nonviable before that .    trevize grunted .   bliss looked at him thoughtfully   how is it that you thought of arming yourself .    trevize said   it did me little good .  it was your ability     not entirely .  i needed your weapon .  at short notice  with only hyperspatial contact with the rest of gaia  with so many individual minds of so unfamiliar a nature  i could have done nothing without your neuronic whip .     my blaster was useless .  i tried that .     with a blaster  trevize  a dog merely disappears .  the rest may be surprised  but not frightened .     worse than that   said trevize .   they ate the remnants .  i was bribing them to stay .     yes  i see that might be the effect .  the neuronic whip is different .  it inflicts pain  and a dog in pain emits cries of a kind that are well understood by other dogs who  by conditioned reflex  if nothing else  begin to feel frightened themselves .  with the dogs already disposed toward fright  i merely nudged their minds  and off they went .     yes  but you realized the whip was the more deadly of the two in this case .  i did not .     i am accustomed to dealing with minds .  you are not .  that s why i insisted on low power and aiming at one dog .  i did not want so much pain that it killed a dog and left him silent .  i did not want the pain so dispersed as to cause mere whimpering .  i wanted strong pain concentrated at one point .     and you got it  bliss   said trevize .   it worked perfectly .  i owe you considerable gratitude .     you begrudge that   said bliss thoughtfully   because it seems to you that you played a ridiculous role .  and yet  i repeat  i could have done nothing without your weapons .  what puzzles me is how you can explain your arming yourself in the face of my assurance that there were no human beings on this world  something i am still certain is a fact .  did you foresee the dogs .     no   said trevize .   i certainly didn t .  not consciously  at least .  and i don t habitually go armed  either .  it never even occurred to me to put on weapons at comporellon .   but i can t allow myself to trip into the trap of feeling it was magic  either .  it couldn t have been .  i suspect that once we began talking about unbalanced ecologies earlier  i somehow had an unconscious glimpse of animals grown dangerous in the absence of human beings .   that is clear enough in hindsight  but i might have had a whiff of it in foresight .  nothing more than that .    bliss said   don t dismiss it that casually .  i participated in the same conversation concerning unbalanced ecologies and i didn t have that same foresight .  it is that special trick of foresight in you that gaia values .  i can see  too  that it must be irritating to you to have a hidden foresight the nature of which you cannot detect  to act with decision  but without clear reason .     the usual expression on terminus is  to act on a hunch .      on gaia we say   to know without thought .   you don t like knowing without thought  do you .     it bothers me  yes .  i don t like being driven by hunches .  i assume hunch has reason behind it  but not knowing the reason makes me feel i m not in control of my own mind a kind of mild madness .     and when you decided in favor of gaia and galaxia  you were acting on s hunch  and now you seek the reason .     i have said so at least a dozen times .     and i have refused to accept your statement as literal truth .  for that sorry .  i will oppose you in this no longer .  i hope  though  that i may continue to point out items in gaia s favor .     always   said trevize   if you  in turn  recognize that them .     does it occur to you  then  that this unknown world is reverting to a kind of savagery  and perhaps to eventual desolation and uninhabitability  because of the removal of a single species that is capable of acting as a guiding intelligence .  if the world were gaia  or better yet  a part of galaxia  this could not happen .  the guiding intelligence would still exist in the form of the galaxy v a whole  and ecology  whenever unbalanced  and for whatever reason  would move toward balance again .     does that mean that dogs would no longer eat .     of course they would eat  just as human beings do .  they would however  with purpose  in order to balance the ecology under deliberate direction  and not as a result of random circumstance .    trevize said   the loss of individual freedom might not matter to dogs  but it must matter to human beings .   and what if all human beings were removed from existence  everywhere  and not merely on one world or on severa  .  what if galaxia were left without human beings at all .  would there still be a guiding intelligence .  would all other life forms and inanimate matter be able to put together a common intelligence adequate for the purpose .    bliss hesitated .   such a situation   she said   has never been experienced .  nor does there seem any likelihood that it will ever be experienced in the future .    trevize said   hut doesn t it seem obvious to you  that the human mind is qualitatively different from everything else  and that if it were absent  the sum total of all other consciousness could not replace it .  would it not be true  then  that human beings are a special case and must be treated as such .  they should not be fused even with one another  let alone with nonhuman objects .     yet you decided in favor of galaxia .     for an overriding reason i cannot make out .     perhaps that overriding reason was a glimpse of the effect of unbalanced ecologies .  might it not have been your reasoning that every world in the galaxy is on a knife edge  with instability on either side  and that only galaxia could prevent such disasters as are taking place on this world to say nothing of the continuing interhuman disasters of war and administrative failure .     no .  unbalanced ecologies were not in my mind at the time of my decision .     how can you be sure .     i may not know what it is i m foreseeing  but if something is suggested afterward  i would recognize it if that were indeed what i foresaw .   as it seems to me i may have foreseen dangerous animals on this world .     well   said bliss soberly   we might have been dead as a result of those dangerous animals if it had not been for a combination of our powers  your foresight and my mentalism .  come  then  let us be friends .    trevize nodded .   if you wish .    there was a chill in his voice that caused bliss s eyebrows to rise  but at this point pelorat burst in  nodding his head as though prepared to shake it off its foundations .    i think   he said   we have it .       .   trevize did not  in general  believe in easy victories  and yet it was only human to fall into belief against one s better judgment .  he felt the muscles in his chest and throat tighten  but managed to say   the location of earth .  have you discovered that  janov .    pelorat stared at trevize for a moment  and deflated .   well  no   he said  visibly abashed .   not quite that .   actually  golan  not that at all .  i had forgotten about that .  it was something else that i discovered in the ruins .  i suppose it s not really important .    trevize managed a long breath and said   never mind  janov .  every finding is important .  what was it you came in to say .     well   said pelorat   it s just that almost nothing survived  you understand .  twenty thousand years of storm and wind don t leave much .  what s more  plant life is gradually destructive and animal life  but never mind all that .  the point is that  almost nothing  is not the same as  nothing .     the ruins must have included a public building  for there was some fallen stone  or concrete  with incised lettering upon it .  there was hardly anything visible  you understand  old chap  but i took photographs with one of those cameras we have on board ship  the kind with built in computer enhancement  i never got round to asking permission to take one  golan  but it was important  and i    trevize waved his hand in impatient dismissal .   go on .     i could make out some of the lettering  which was very archaic .  even with computer enhancement and with my own fair skill at reading archaic  it was impossible to make out much except for one short phrase .  the letters there were larger and a bit clearer than the rest .  they may have been incised more deeply because they identified the world itself .  the phrase reads   planet aurora   so i imagine this world we rest upon is named aurora  or was named aurora .     it had to be named something   said trevize .    yes  but names are very rarely chosen at random .  i made a careful search of my library just now and there are two old legends  from two widely spaced worlds  as it happens  so that one can reasonably suppose them to be of independent origin  if one remembers that .   but never mind that .  in both legends  aurora is used as a name for the dawn .  we can suppose that aurora may have actually meant dawn in some pre galactic language .    as it happens  some word for dawn or daybreak is often used as a name for space stations or other structures that are the first built of their kind .  if this world is called dawn in whatever language  it may be the first of its kind  too .    trevize said   are you getting ready to suggest that this planet is earth and that aurora is an alternate name for it because it represents the dawn of life and of man .    pelorat said   i couldn t go that far  golan .    trevize said  with a trace of bitterness   there is  after all  no radioactive surface  no giant satellite  no gas giant with huge rings .     exactly .  but deniador  back on comporellon  seemed to think this was one of the worlds that was once inhabited by the first wave of settlers the spacers .  if it were  then its name  aurora  might indicate it to have been the first of those spacer worlds .  we might  at this very moment  be resting on the oldest human world in the galaxy except for earth itself .  isn t that exciting .     interesting  at any rate  janov  but isn t that a great deal to infer merely from the name  aurora .     there s more   said pelorat excitedly .   as far as i could check in my records there is no world in the galaxy today with the name of  aurora   and i m sure your computer will verify that .  as i said  there are all sorts of world and other objects named  dawn  in various ways  but no one uses the actual word  aurora .      why should they .  if it s a pre galactic word  it wouldn t be likely to be popular .     but names do remain  even when they re meaningless .  if this were the first settled world  it would be famous  it might even  for a while  have been the dominant world of the galaxy .  surely  there would be other worlds calling themselves  new aurora   or  aurora minor   or something like that .  and then others    trevize broke in .   perhaps it wasn t the first settled world .  perhaps it was never of any importance .     there s a better reason in my opinion  my dear chap .     what would that be  janov .     if the first wave of settlements was overtaken by a second wave to which all the worlds of the galaxy now belong as deniador said then there is very likely to have been a period of hostility between the two waves .  the second wave making up the worlds that now exist would not use the names given to any of the worlds of the first wave .  in that way  we can infer from the fact that the name  aurora  has never been repeated that there were two waves of settlers  and that this is a world of the first wave .    trevize smiled .   i m getting a glimpse of how you mythologists work  janov .  you build a beautiful superstructure  but it may be standing on air .  the legends tell us that the settlers of the first wave were accompanied by numerous robots  and that these were supposed to be their undoing .  now if we could find a robot on this world  i d be willing to accept all this first wave supposition  but we can t expect after twenty thou    pelorat  whose mouth had been working  managed to find his voice .   but  golan  haven t i told you .   no  of course  i haven t .  i m so excited i can t put things in the right order .  there was a robot .       .   trevize rubbed his forehead  almost as though he were in pain .  he said   a robot .  there was a robot .     yes   said pelorat  nodding his head emphatically .    how do you know .     why  it was a robot .  how could i fail to know one if i see one .     have you ever seen a robot before .     no  but it was a metal object that looked like a human being .  head  arms  legs  torso .  of course  when i say metal  it was mostly rust  and when i walked toward it  i suppose the vibration of my tread damaged it further  so that when i reached to touch it     why should you touch it .     well  i suppose i couldn t quite believe my eyes .  it was an automatic response .  as soon as i touched it  it crumbled .  but     yes .     before it quite did  its eyes seemed to glow very faintly and it made a sound as though it were trying to say something .     you mean it was still functioning .     just barely  golan .  then it collapsed .    trevize turned to bliss .   do you corroborate all this  bliss .     it was a robot  and we saw it   said bliss .    and was it still functioning .    bliss said tonelessly   as it crumbled  i caught a faint sense of neuronic activity .     how can there have been neuronic activity .  a robot doesn t have an organic brain built of cells .     it has the computerized equivalent  i imagine   said bliss   and i would detect that .     did you detect a robotic rather than a human mentality .    bliss pursed her lips and said   it was too feeble to decide anything about it except that it was there .    trevize looked at bliss  then at pelorat  and said  in a tone of exasperation   this changes everything .      part four   solaria  chapter     robots    trevize seemed lost in thought during dinner  and bliss concentrated on the food .   pelorat  the only one who seemed anxious to speak  pointed out that if the world they were on was aurora and if it was the first settled world  it ought to be fairly close to earth .    it might pay to scour the immediate stellar neighborhood   he said .   it would only mean sifting through a few hundred stars at most .    trevize muttered that hit and miss was a last resort and he wanted as much information about earth as possible before attempting to approach it even if he found it .  he said no more and pelorat  clearly squelched  dwindled into silence as well .   after the meal  as trevize continued to volunteer nothing  pelorat said tentatively   are we to be staying here  golan .     overnight  anyway   said trevize .   i need to do a bit more thinking .     is it safe .     unless there s something worse than dogs about   said trevize   we re quite safe here in the ship .    pelorat said   how long would it take to lift off  if there is something worse than dogs about .    trevize said   the computer is on launch alert .  i think we can manage to take off in between two and three minutes .  and it will warn us quite effectively if anything unexpected takes place  so i suggest we all get some sleep .  tomorrow morning  i ll come to a decision as to the next move .    easy to say  thought trevize  as he found himself staring at the darkness .  he was curled up  partly dressed  on the floor of the computer room .  it was quite uncomfortable  but he was sure that his bed would be no more conducive to sleep at this time and here at least he could take action at once if the computer sounded an alarm .   then he heard footsteps and automatically sat up  hitting his head against the edge of the desk not hard enough to do damage  but hard enough to make rubbing and grimacing a necessity .    janov .   he said in a muffled voice  eyes tearing .    no .  it s bliss .    trevize reached over the edge of the table with one hand to make at least semicontact with the computer  and a soft light showed bliss in a light pink wraparound .   trevize said   what is it .     i looked in your bedroom and you weren t there .  there was no mistaking your neuronic activity  however  and i followed it .  you were clearly awake so i walked in .     yes  but what is it you want .    she sat down against the wall  knees up  and cradled her chin against them .  she said   don t be concerned .  i have no designs on what s left of your virginity .     i don t imagine you do   said trevize sardonically .   why aren t you asleep .  you need it more than we do .     believe me   she said in a low  heartfelt tone   that episode with the dogs was very draining .     i believe that .     but i had to talk to you when pel was sleeping .     about what .    bliss said   when he told you about the robot  you said that that changes everything .  what did you mean .    trevize said   don t you see that for yourself .  we have three sets of coordinates  three forbidden worlds .  i want to visit all three to learn as much as possible about earth before trying to reach it .    he edged a bit closer so that he could speak lower still  then drew away sharply .  he said   look  i don t want janov coming in here looking for us .  i don t know what he d think .     it s not likely .  he s sleeping and i ve encouraged that just a bit .  if he stirs  i ll know .   go on .  you want to visit all three .  what s changed .     it wasn t part of my plan to waste time on any world needlessly .  if this world  aurora  had been without human occupation for twenty thousand years  then it is doubtful that any information of value has survived .  i don t want to spend weeks or months scrabbling uselessly about the planetary surface  fighting off dogs and cats and bulls or whatever else may have become wild and dangerous  just on the hope of finding a scrap of reference material amid the dust  rust  and decay .  it may be that on one or both of the other forbidden worlds there may be human beings and intact libraries .    so it was my intention to leave this world at once .  we d be out in space now  if i had done so  sleeping in perfect security .     but .     but if there are robots still functioning on this world  they may have important information that we could use .  they would be safer to deal with than human beings would be  since  from what i ve heard  they must follow orders and can t harm human beings .     so you ve changed your plan and now you re going to spend time on this world searching for robots .     i don t want to  bliss .  it seems to me that robots can t last twenty thousand years without maintenance .   yet since you ve seen one with a spark of activity still  it s clear i can t rely on my commonsense guesses about robots .  i mustn t lead out of ignorance .  robots may be more enduring than i imagine  or they may have a certain capacity for self maintenance .    bliss said   listen to me  trevize  and please keep this confidential .     confidential .   said trevize  raising his voice in surprise .   from whom .     sh .  from pel  of course .  look  you don t have to change your plans .  you were right the first time .  there are no functioning robots on this world .  i detect nothing .     you detected that one  and one is as good as     i did not detect that one .  it was nonfunctioning  long nonfunctioning .     you said     i know what i said .  pel thought he saw motion and heard sound .  pel is a romantic .  he s spent his working life gathering data  but that is a difficult way of making one s mark in the scholarly world .  he would dearly love to make an important discovery of his own .  his finding of the word  aurora  was legitimate and made him happier than you can imagine .  he wanted desperately to find more .    trevize said   are you telling me he wanted to make a discovery so badly he convinced himself he had come upon a functioning robot when he hadn t .     what he came upon was a lump of rust containing no more consciousness than the rock against which it rested .     but you supported his story .     i could not bring myself to rob him of his discovery .  he means so much to me .   trevize stared at her for a full minute  then he said   do you mind explaining why he means so much to you .  i want to know .  i really want to know .  to you he must seem an elderly man with nothing romantic about him .  he s an isolate  and you despise isolates .  you re young and beautiful and there must    other parts of gaia that have the bodies of vigorous and handsome young am .  with them you can have a physical relationship that can resonate through gaia and bring peaks of ecstasy .  so what do you an in janov .    bliss looked at trevize solemnly .   don t you love him .    trevize shrugged and said   i m fond of him .  i suppose you could say  in a nonsexual way  that i love him .     you haven t known him very long  trevize .  why do you love him  in that nonsexual way of yours .    trevize found himself smiling without being aware of it .   he s such an odd fellow .  i honestly think that never in his life has he given a single thought to himself .  he was ordered to go along with me  and he went .  no objection .  he wanted me to go to trantor  but when i said i wanted to go to gaia  he never argued .  and now he s come along with me in this search for earth  though he must know it s dangerous .  i feel perfectly confident that if he had to sacrifice his life for me or for anyone he would  and without repining .     would you give your life for him  trevize .     i might  if i didn t have time to think .  if i did have time to think  i would hesitate and i might funk it .  i m not as good as he is .  and because of that  i have this terrible urge to protect and keep him good .  i don t want the galaxy to teach him not to be good .  do you understand .  and i have to protect him from you particularly .  i can t bear the thought of you tossing him aside when whatever nonsense amuses you now is done with .     yes  i thought you d think something like that .  don t you suppose i see in pel what you see in him and even more so  since i can contact his mind directly .  do i act as though i want to hurt him .  would i support his fantasy of having seen a functioning robot  if it weren t that i couldn t bear to hurt him .  trevize  i am used to what you would call goodness  for every part of gaia is ready to be sacrificed for the whole .  we know and understand no other course of action .  but we give up nothing in so doing  for each part is the whole  though i don t expect you to understand that .  pel is something different .    bliss was no longer looking at trevize .  it was as though she were talking to herself .   he is an isolate .  he is not selfless because he is a part of a greater whole .  he is selfless because he is selfless .  do you understand me .  he has all to lose and nothing to gain  and yet he is what he is .  he shames me for being what i am without fear of loss  when he is what he is without hope of gain .    she looked up at trevize again now  very solemnly .   do you know how much more i understand about him than you possibly can .  and do you think i would harm him in any way .    trevize said   bliss  earlier today  you said   come  let us be friends   and all i replied was   if you wish .   that was grudging of me  for i was thinking of what you might do to janov .  it is my turn  now .  come  bliss  let us be friends .  you can keep on pointing out the advantage of galaxia and i may keep on refusing to accept your arguments  but even so  and despite that  let us be friends .   and he held out his hand .    of course  trevize   she said  and their hands gripped each other strongly .      .   trevize grinned quietly to himself .  it was an internal grin  for the line of his mouth didn t budge .   when he had worked with the computer to find the star  if any  of the first set of co ordinates  both pelorat and bliss had watched intently and had asked questions .  now they stayed in their room and slept or  at any rate  relaxed  and left the job entirely to trevize .   in a way  it was flattering  for it seemed to trevize that by now they had simply accepted the fact that trevize knew what he was doing and required no supervision or encouragement .  for that matter  trevize had gained enough experience from the first episode to rely more thoroughly on the computer and to feel that it needed  if not none  then at least less supervision .   another star luminous and unrecorded on the galactic map showed up .  this second star was more luminous than the star about which aurora circled  and that made it all the more significant that the star was unrecorded in the computer .   trevize marveled at the peculiarities of ancient tradition .  whole centuries might be telescoped or dropped out of consciousness altogether .  entire civilizations might be banished into forgetfulness .  yet out of the midst of these centuries  snatched from those civilizations  might be one or two factual items that would be remembered undistorted such as these co ordinates .   he had remarked on this to pelorat some time before  and pelorat had at once told him that it was precisely this that made the study of myths and legends so rewarding .   the trick is   pelorat had said   to work out or decide which particular components of a legend represent accurate underlying truth .  that isn t easy and different mythologists are likely to pick different components  depending  usually  on which happen to suit their particular interpretations .    .   in any case  the star was right where deniador s co ordinates  corrected for time  said it would be .  trevize was prepared  at this moment  to wager a considerable sum that the third star would be in place as well .  and if it was  trevize was prepared to suspect that the legend was further correct in stating that there were fifty forbidden worlds altogether  despite the suspiciously even number  and to wonder where the other forty seven might be .   a habitable world  forbidden world  was found circling the star and by this time its presence didn t cause even a ripple of surprise in trevize s bosom .  he had been absolutely sure it would be there .  he set the far star into a slow orbit about it .   the cloud layer was sparse enough to allow a reasonable view of the surface from space .  the world was a watery one  as almost all habitable worlds were .  there was an unbroken tropical ocean and two unbroken polar oceans .   in one set of middle latitudes  there was a more or less serpentine continent encircling the world with bays on either side producing an occasional narrow isthmus .  in the other set of middle latitudes  the land surface was broken into three large parts and each of the three were thicker north south than the opposite continent was .   trevize wished he knew enough climatology to be able to predict  from what he saw  what the temperatures and seasons might be like .  for a moment  he toyed with the idea of having the computer work on the problem .  the trouble was that climate was not the point at issue .   much more important was that  once again  the computer detected no radiation that might be of technological origin .  what his telescope told him was that the planet was not moth eaten and that there were no signs of desert .  the land moved backward in various shades of green  but there were no signs of urban areas on the dayside  no lights on the nightside .   was this another planet filled with every kind of life but human .   he rapped at the door of the other bedroom .    bliss .   he called out in a loud whisper  and rapped again .   there was a rustling  and bliss s voice said   yes .     could you come out here .  i need your help     if you wait just a bit  i ll make myself a bit presentable .    when she finally appeared  she looked as presentable as trevize had ever seen her .  he felt a twinge of annoyance at having been made to wait  however  for it made little difference to him what she looked like .  but they were friends now  and he suppressed the annoyance .   she said with a smile and in a perfectly pleasant tone   what can i do for you  trevize .    trevize waved at the viewscreen .   as you can see  we re passing over the surface of what looks like a perfectly healthy world with a quite solid vegetation cover over its land area .  no lights at night  however  and no technological radiation .  please listen and tell me if there s any animal life .  there was one point at which i thought i could see herds of grazing animals  but i wasn t sure .  it might be a case of seeing what one desperately wants to see .    bliss  listened .   at least  a curiously intent look came across her face .  she said   oh yes  rich in animal life .     mammalian .     must be .     human .    now she seemed to concentrate harder .  a full minute passed  and then another  and finally she relaxed .   i can t quite tell .  every once in a while it seemed to me that i detected a whiff of intelligence sufficiently intense to be considered human .  but it was so feeble and so occasional that perhaps i  too  was only sensing what i desperately wanted to sense .  you see    she paused in thought  and trevize nudged her with a  well .    she said   the thing is i seem to detect something else .  it is not something i m familiar with  but i don t see how it can be anything but    her face tightened again as she began to  listen  with still greater intensity .    well .   said trevize again .   she relaxed .   i don t see how it can be anything but robots .     robots .     yes  and if i detect them  surely i ought to be able to detect human beings  too .  but i don t .     robots .   said trevize again  frowning .    yes   said bliss   and i should judge  in great numbers .       .   pelorat also said  robots .   in almost exactly trevize s tone when he was told of them .  then he smiled slightly .   you were right  golan  and i was wrong to doubt you .     i don t remember your doubting me  janov .     oh well  old man  i didn t think i ought to express it .  i just thought  in my heart  that it was a mistake to leave aurora while there was a chance we might interview some surviving robot .  but then it s clear you knew there would be a richer supply of robots here .     not at all  janov .  i didn t know .  i merely chanced it .  bliss tells me their mental fields seem to imply they are fully functioning  and it seems to me they can t very well be fully functioning without human beings about for care and maintenance .  however  she can t spot anything human so we re still looking .      pelorat studied the viewscreen thoughtfully .   it seems to be all forest  doesn t it .     mostly forest .  but there are clear patches that may be grasslands .  the thing is that i see no cities  or any lights at night  or anything but thermal radiation at any time .     so no human beings after all .     i wonder .  bliss is in the galley trying to concentrate .  i ve set up an arbitrary prime meridian for the planet which means that it s divided into latitude and longitude in the computer .  bliss has a little device which she presses whenever she encounters what seems an unusual concentration of robotic mental activity i suppose you can t say  neuronic activity  in connection with robots or any whiff of human thought .  the device is linked to the computer  which thus gets a fix on all the latitudes and longitudes  and we ll let it make the choice among them and pick a good place for landing .    pelorat looked uneasy .   is it wise to leave the matter of choice to the computer .     why not  janov .  it s a very competent computer .  besides  when you have no basis on which to make a choice yourself  where s the harm in at least considering the computer s choice .    pelorat brightened up .   there s something to that  golan .  some of the oldest legends include tales of people making choices by tossing cubes to the ground .     oh .  what does that accomplish .     each face of the cube has some decision on it yes no perhaps postpone and so on .  whichever face happens to come upward on landing would be taken as bearing the advice to be followed .  or they would set a ball rolling about a slotted disc with different decisions scattered among the slots .  the decision written on the slot in which the ball ends is to be taken .  some mythologists think such activities represented games of chance rather than lotteries  but the two are much the same thing in my opinion .     in a way   said trevize   we re playing a game of chance in choosing our place of landing .    bliss emerged from the galley in time to hear the last comment .  she said   no game of chance .  i pressed several  maybes  and then one sure fire  yes   and it s to the  yes  that we ll be going .     what made it a  yes  .   asked trevize .    i caught a whiff of human thought .  definite .  unmistakable .       .   it had been raining  for the grass was wet .  overhead  the clouds were scudding by and showing signs of breaking up .   the far star had come to a gentle rest near a small grove of trees .   in case of wild dogs  trevize thought  only partly in jest .   all about was what looked like pasture land  and coming down from the greater height at which a better and wider view had been possible  trevize had seen what looked like orchards and grain fields and this time  an unmistakable view of grazing animals .   there were no structures  however .  nothing artificial  except that the regularity of the trees in the orchard and the sharp boundaries that separated fields were themselves as artificial as a microwave receiving power station would have been .   could that level of artificiality have been produced by robots  however .  without human beings .   quietly  trevize was putting on his holsters .  this time  he knew that both weapons were in working order and that both were fully charged .  for a moment  he caught bliss s eye and paused .   she said   go ahead .  i don t think you ll have any use for them  but i thought as much once before  didn t i .    trevize said   would you like to be armed  janov .    pelorat shuddered .   no  thank you .  between you and your physical defense  and bliss and her mental defense  i feel in no danger at all .  i suppose it is cowardly of me to hide in your protective shadows  but i can t feel proper shame when i m too busy feeling grateful that i needn t be in a position of possibly having to use force .    trevize said   i understand .  just don t go anywhere alone .  if bliss and i separate  you stay with one of us and don t dash off somewhere under the spur of a private curiosity .     you needn t worry  trevize   said bliss .   i ll see to that .    trevize stepped out of the ship first .  the wind was brisk and just a trifle cool in the aftermath of the rain  but trevize found that welcome .  it had probably been uncomfortably warm and humid before the rain .   he took in his breath with surprise .  the smell of the planet was delightful .  every planet had its own odor  he knew  an odor always strange and usually distasteful perhaps only because it was strange .  might not strange be pleasant as well .  or was this the accident of catching the planet just after the rain at a particular season of the year .  whichever it was    come on   he called .   it s quite pleasant out here .    pelorat emerged and said   pleasant is definitely the word for it .  do you suppose it always smells like this .     it doesn t matter .  within the hour  we ll be accustomed to the aroma  and our nasal receptors will be sufficiently saturated  for us to smell nothing .     pity   said pelorat .    the grass is wet   said bliss  with a shade of disapproval .    why not .  after all  it rains on gaia  too .   said trevize  and as he said that a shaft of yellow sunlight reached them momentarily through a small break in the clouds .  there would soon be more of it .    yes   said bliss   but we know when and we re prepared for it .     too bad   said trevize   you lose the thrill of the unexpected .    bliss said   you re right .  i ll try not to be provincial .    pelorat looked about and said  in a disappointed tone   there seems to be nothing about .     only seems to be   said bliss .   they re approaching from beyond that rise .   she looked toward trevize .   do you think we ought to go to meet them .    trevize shook his head .   no .  we ve come to meet them across many parsecs .  let them walk the rest of the way .  we ll wait for them here .    only bliss could sense the approach until  from the direction of her pointing finger  a figure appeared over the brow of the rise .  then a second  and a third .    i believe that is all at the moment   said bliss .   trevize watched curiously .  though he had never seen robots  there was not a particle of doubt in him that that was what they were .  they had the schematic and impressionistic shape of human beings and yet were not obviously metallic in appearance .  the robotic surface was dull and gave the illusion of softness  as though it were covered in plush .   but how did he know the softness was an illusion .  trevize felt a sudden desire to feel those figures who were approaching so stolidly .  if it were true that this was a forbidden world and that spaceships never approached it and surely that must be so since the sun was not included in the galactic map  then the far star and the people it carried must represent something the robots had never experienced .  yet they were reacting with steady certainty  as though they were working their way through a routine exercise .   trevize said  in a low voice   here we may have information we can get nowhere else in the galaxy .  we could ask them for the location of earth with reference to this world  and if they know  they will tell us .  who knows how long these things have functioned and endured .  they may answer out of personal memory .  think of that .     on the other hand   said bliss   they may be recently manufactured and may know nothing .     or   said pelorat   they may know  but may refuse to tell us .    trevize said   i suspect they can t refuse unless they ve been ordered not to tell us  and why should such orders be issued when surely no one on this planet could have expected our coming .    at a distance of about three meters  the robots stopped .  they said nothing and made no further movement .   trevize  his hand on his blaster  said to bliss  without taking his eyes from the robot   can you tell whether they are hostile .     you ll have to allow for the fact that i have no experience whatsoever with their mental workings  trevize  but i don t detect anything that seems hostile .    trevize took his right hand away from the butt of the weapon  but kept it near .  he raised his left hand  palm toward the robots  in what he hoped would be recognized as a gesture of peace and said  speaking slowly   i greet you .  we come to this world as friends .    the central robot of the three ducked his head in a kind of abortive bow that might also have been taken as a gesture of peace by an optimist  and replied .   trevize s jaw dropped in astonishment .  in a world of galactic communication  one did not think of failure in so fundamental a need .  however  the robot did not speak in galactic standard or anything approaching it .  in fact  trevize could not understand a word .      .   pelorat s surprise was as great as that of trevize  but there was an obvious element of pleasure in it  too .    isn t that strange .   he said .   trevize turned to him and said  with more than a touch of asperity in his voice   it s not strange .  it s gibberish .    pelorat said   not gibberish at all .  it s galactic  but very archaic .  i catch a few words .  i could probably understand it easily if it were written down .  it s the pronunciation that s the real puzzle .     well  what did it say .     i think it told you it didn t understand what you said .    bliss said   i can t tell what it said  but what i sense is puzzlement  which fits .  that is  if i can trust my analysis of robotic emotion or if there is such a thing as robotic emotion .    speaking very slowly  and with difficulty  pelorat said something  and the three robots ducked their head in unison .    what was that .   said trevize .   pelorat said   i said i couldn t speak well  but i would try .  i asked for a little time .  dear me  old chap  this is fearfully interesting .     fearfully disappointing   muttered trevize .    you see   said pelorat   every habitable planet in the galaxy manages to work out its own variety of galactic so that there are a million dialects that are sometimes barely intercomprehensible  but they re all pulled together by the development of galactic standard .  assuming this world to have been isolated for twenty thousand years  the language would ordinarily drift so far from that of the rest of the galaxy as to be an entirely different language .  that it isn t may be because the world has a social system that depends upon robots which can only understand the language as spoken in the fashion in which they were programmed .  rather than keep reprogramming  the language remained static and we now have what is to us merely a very archaic form of galactic .     there s an example   said trevize   of how a robotized society can be held static and made  to turn degenerate .     but  my dear fellow   protested pelorat   keeping a language relatively unchanged is not necessarily a sign of degeneration .  there are advantages to it .  documents preserved for centuries and millennia retain their meaning and give greater longevity and authority to historical records .  in the rest of the galaxy  the language of imperial edicts of the time of hari seldon already begins to sound quaint .     and do you know this archaic galactic .     not to say know  golan .  it s just that in studying ancient myths and legends i ve picked up the trick of it .  the vocabulary is not entirely different  but it is inflected differently  and there are idiomatic expressions we don t use any longer and  as i have said  the pronunciation is totally changed .  i can act as interpreter  but not as a very good one .    trevize heaved a tremulous sigh .   a small stroke of good fortune is better than none .  carry on  janov .    pelorat turned to the robots  waited a moment  then looked back at trevize .   what am i supposed to say .     let s go all the way .  ask them where earth is .    pelorat said the words one at a time  with exaggerated gestures of his hands .   the robots looked at each other and made a few sounds .  the middle one then spoke to pelorat  who replied while moving his hands apart as though he were stretching a length of rubber .  the robot responded by spacing his words as carefully as pelorat had .   pelorat said to trevize   i m not sure i m getting across what i mean by  earth .   i suspect they think i m referring to some region on their planet and they say they don t know of any such region .     do they use the name of this planet  janov .     the closest i can come to what i think they are using as the name is  solaria .       have you ever heard of it in your legends .     no any more than i had ever heard of aurora .     well  ask them if there is any place named earth in the sky among the stars .  point upward .    again an exchange  and finally pelorat turned and said   all i can get from them  golan  is that there are no places in the sky .    bliss said   ask those robots how old they are  or rather  how long they have been functioning .     i don t know how to say  functioning    said pelorat  shaking his head .  in fact  i m not sure if i can say  how old .   i m not a very good interpreter .     do the best you can  pel dear   said bliss .   and after several exchanges  pelorat said   they ve been functioning for twenty six years .     twenty six years   muttered trevize in disgust .   they re hardly older than you are  bliss .    bliss said  with sudden pride   it so happens     i know .  you re gaia  which is thousands of years old .   in any case  these robots cannot talk about earth from personal experience  and their memorybanks clearly do not include anything not necessary to their functioning .  so they know nothing about astronomy .    pelorat said   there may be other robots somewhere on the planet that are primordial  perhaps .     i doubt it   said trevize   but ask them  if you can find the words for it  janov .    this time there was quite a long conversation and pelorat eventually broke it off with a flushed face and a clear air of frustration .    golan   he said   i don t understand part of what they re trying to say  but i gather that the older robots are used for manual labor and don t know anything .  if this robot were a human  i d say he spoke of the older robots with contempt .  these three are house robots  they say  and are not allowed to grow old before being replaced .  they re the ones who really know things their words  not mine .     they don t know much   growled trevize .   at least of the things we want to know .     i now regret   said pelorat   that we left aurora so hurriedly .  if we had found a robot survivor there  and we surely would have  since the very first one i encountered still had a spark of life left in it  they would know of earth through personal memory .     provided their memories were intact  janov   said trevize .   we can always go back there and  if we have to  dog packs or not  we will .   but if these robots are only a couple of decades old  there must be those who manufacture them  and the manufacturers must be human  i should think .   he turned to bliss .   are you sure you sensed    but she raised a hand to stop him and there was a strained and intent look on her face .   coming now   she said  in a low voice .   trevize turned his face toward the rise and there  first appearing from behind it  and then striding toward them  was the unmistakable figure of a human being .  his complexion was pale and his hair light and long  standing out slightly from the sides of his head .  his face was grave but quite young in appearance .  his bare arms and legs were not particularly muscled .   the robots stepped aside for him  and he advanced till he stood in their midst .   he then spoke in a clear  pleasant voice and his words  although used archaically  were in galactic standard  and easily understood .    greetings  wanderers from space   he said .   what would you with my robots .       .   trevize did not cover himself with glory .  .  he said foolishly   you speak galactic .    the solarian said  with a grim smile   and why not  since i am not mute .     but these .   trevize gestured toward the robots .    these are robots .  they speak our language  as i do .  but i am solarian and hear the hyperspatial communications of the worlds beyond so that i have learned your way of speaking  as have my predecessors .  my predecessors have left descriptions of the language  but i constantly hear new words and expressions that change with the years  as though you settlers can settle worlds  but not words .  how is it you are surprised at my understanding of your language .     i should not have been   said trevize .   i apologize .  it was just that speaking to the robots  i had not thought to hear galactic on this world .    he studied the solarian .  he was wearing a thin white robe  draped loosely over his shoulder  with large openings for his arms .  it was open in front  exposing a bare chest and loincloth below .  except for a pair of light sandals  he wore nothing else .   it occurred to trevize that he could not tell whether the solarian was male or female .  the breasts were male certainly but the chest was hairless and the thin loincloth showed no bulge of any kind .   he turned to bliss and said in a low voice   this might still be a robot  but very like a human being in    bliss said  her lips hardly moving   the mind is that of a human being  not a robot .    the solarian said   yet you have not answered my original question .  i shall excuse the failure and put it down to your surprise .  i now ask again and you must not fail a second time .  what would you with my robots .    trevize said   we are travelers who seek information to reach our destination .  we asked your robots for information that would help us  but they lacked the knowledge .     what is the information you seek .  perhaps i can help you .     we seek the location of earth .  could you tell us that .    the solarian s eyebrows lifted .   i would have thought that your first object of curiosity would have been myself .  i will supply that information although you have not asked for it .  i am sarton bander and you stand upon the bander estate  which stretches as far as your eye can see in every direction and far beyond .  i cannot say that you are welcome here  for in coming here  you have violated a trust .  you are the first settlers to touch down upon solaria in many thousands of years and  as it turns out  you have come here merely to inquire as to the best way of reaching another world .  in the old days  settlers  you and your ship would have been destroyed on sight .     that would be a barbaric way of treating people who mean no harm and offer none   said trevize cautiously .    i agree  but when members of an expanding society set foot upon an inoffensive and static one  that mere touch is filled with potential harm .  while we feared that harm  we were ready to destroy those who came at the instant of their coming .  since we no longer have reason to fear  we are  as you see  ready to talk .    trevize s    i appreciate the information you have offered us so freely  and yet you failed to answer the question i did ask .  i will repeat it .  could you tell us the location of the planet earth .     by earth  i take it you mean the world on which the human species  and the various species of plants and animals  his hand moved gracefully about as though to indicate all the surroundings about them  originated .     yes  i do  sir .    a queer look of repugnance flitted over the solarian s face .  he said   please address me simply as bander  if you must use a form of address .  do not address me by any word that includes a sign of gender .  i am neither male nor female .  i am whole .    trevize nodded  he had been right  .   as you wish  bander .  what  then  is the location of earth  the world of origin of all of us .    bander said   i do not know .  nor do i wish to know .  if i did know  or if i could find out  it would do you no good  for earth no longer exists as a world .   ah   he went on  stretching out his arms .   the sun feels good .  i am not often on the surface  and never when the sun does not show itself .  my robots were sent to greet you while the sun was yet hiding behind the clouds .  i followed only when the clouds cleared .     why is it that earth no longer exists as a world .   said trevize insistently  steeling himself for the tale of radioactivity once again .   bander  however  ignored the question or  rather  put it to one side carelessly .   the story is too long   he said .   you told me that you came with no intent of harm .     that is correct .     why then did you come armed .     that is merely a precaution .  i did not know what i might meet .     it doesn t matter .  your little weapons represent no danger to me .  yet i am curious .  i have  of course  heard much of your arms  and of your curiously barbaric history that seems to depend so entirely upon arms .  even so  i have never actually seen a weapon .  may i see yours .    trevize took a step backward .   i m afraid not  bander .    bander seemed amused .   i asked only out of politeness .  i need not have asked at all .    it held out its hand and from trevize s right holster  there emerged his blaster  while from his left holster  there rose up his neuronic whip .  trevize snatched at his weapons but felt his arms held back as though by stiffly elastic bonds .  both pelorat and bliss started forward and it was clear that they were held as well .   bander said   don t bother trying to interfere .  you cannot .   the weapons flew to its hands and it looked them over carefully .   this one   it said  indicating the blaster   seems to be a microwave beamer that produces heat  thus exploding any fluid containing body .  the other is more subtle  and  i must confess  i do not see at a glance what it is intended to do .  however  since you mean no harm and offer no harm  you don t need arms .  i can  and i do  bleed the energy content of the units of each weapon .  that leaves them harmless unless you use one or the other as a club  and they would be clumsy indeed if used for that purpose .    the solarian released the weapons and again they drifted through the air  this time back toward trevize .  each settled neatly into its holster .   trevize  feeling himself released  pulled out his blaster  but there was no need to use it .  the contact hung loosely  and the energy unit had clearly been totally drained .  that was precisely the case with the neuronic whip as well .   he looked up at bander  who said  smiling   you are quite helpless  outworlder .  i can as easily  if i so desired  destroy your ship and  of course  you .      chapter       underground       .     trevize felt frozen .  trying to breathe normally  he turned to look at bliss .  she was standing with her arm protectively about pelorat s waist  and  to all appearances  was quite calm .  she smiled slightly and  even more slightly  nodded her head .   trevize turned back to bander .  having interpreted bliss s actions as signifying confidence  and hoping with dreadful earnestness that he was correct  he said grimly   how did you do that  bander .    bander smiled  obviously in high good humor .   tell me  little outworlders  do you believe in sorcery .  in magic .     no  we do not  little solarian   snapped trevize .   bliss tugged at trevize s sleeve and whispered   don t irritate him .  he s dangerous .     i can see he is   said trevize  keeping his voice low with difficulty .   you do something  then .    her voice barely heard  bliss said   not yet .  he will be less dangerous if he feels secure .    bander paid no attention to the brief whispering among the outworlders .  it moved away from them uncaringly  the robots separating to let it pass .   then it looked back and crooked a finger languidly .   come .  follow me .  all three of you .  i will tell you a story that may not interest you  but that interests me .   it continued to walk forward leisurely .   trevize remained in place for a while  uncertain as to the best course of action .  bliss walked forward  however  and the pressure of her arm led pelorat forward as well .  eventually  trevize moved  the alternative was to be left standing alone with the robots .   bliss said lightly   if bander will be so kind as to tell the story that may not interest us    bander turned and looked intently at bliss as though he were truly aware of her for the first time .   you are the feminine half human   he said   aren t you .  the lesser half .     the smaller half  bander .  yes .     these other two are masculine half humans  then .     so they are .     have you had your child yet  feminine .     my name  bander  is bliss .  i have not yet had a child .  this is trevize .  this is pel .     and which of these two masculines is to assist you when it is your time .  or will it be both .  or neither .     pel will assist me  bander .    bander turned his attention to pelorat .   you have white hair  i see .    pelorat said   i have .     was it always that color .     no  bander  it became so with age .     and how old are you .     i am fifty two years old  bander   pelorat said  then added hastily   that s galactic standard years .    bander continued to walk  toward the distant mansion  trevize assumed   but more slowly .  it said   i don t know how long a galactic standard year is  but it can t be very different from our year .  and how old will you be when you die  pel .     i can t say .  i may live thirty more years .     eighty two years  then .  short lived  and divided in halves .  unbelievable  and yet my distant ancestors were like you and lived on earth .   but some of them left earth to establish new worlds around other stars  wonderful worlds  well organized  and many .    trevize said loudly   not many .  fifty .    bander turned a lofty eye on trevize .  there seemed less humor in it now .   trevize .  that s your name .     golan trevize in full .  i say there were fifty spacer worlds .  our worlds number in the millions .     do you know  then  the story that i wish to tell you .   said bander softly .    if the story is that there were once fifty spacer worlds  we know it .     we count not in numbers only  little half human   said bander .   we count the quality  too .  there were fifty  but such a fifty that not all your millions could make up one of them .  and solaria was the fiftieth and  therefore  the best .  solaria was as far beyond the other spacer worlds  as they were beyond earth .    we of solaria alone learned how life was to be lived .  we did not herd and flock like animals  as they did on earth  as they did on other worlds  as they did even on the other spacer worlds .  we lived each alone  with robots to help us  viewing each other electronically as often as we wished  but coming within natural sight of one another only rarely .  it is many years since i have gazed at human beings as i now gaze at you but  then  you are only half humans and your presence  therefore  does not limit my freedom any more than a cow would limit it  or a robot .    yet we were once half human  too .  no matter how we perfected our freedom  no matter how we developed as solitary masters over countless robots  the freedom was never absolute .  in order to produce young there had to be two individuals in co operation .  it was possible  of course  to contribute sperm cells and egg cells  to have the fertilization process and the consequent embryonic growth take place artificially in automated fashion .  it was possible for the infant to live adequately under robotic care .  it could all be done  but the half humans would not give up the pleasure that went with biological impregnation .  perverse emotional attachments would develop in consequence and freedom vanished .  do you see that that had to be changed .    trevize said   no  bander  because we do not measure freedom by your standards .     that is because you do not know what freedom is .  you have never lived but in swarms  and you know no way of life but to be constantly forced  in even the smallest things  to bend your wills to those of others or  which is equally vile  to spend your days struggling to force others to bend their wills to yours .  where is any possible freedom there .  freedom is nothing if it is not to live as you wish .  exactly as you wish .    then came the time when the earthpeople began to swarm outward once more  when their clinging crowds again swirled through space .  the other spacers  who did not flock as the earthpeople did  but who flocked nevertheless  if to a lesser degree  tried to compete .    we solarians did not .  we foresaw inevitable failure in swarming .  we moved underground and broke off all contact with the rest of the galaxy .  we were determined to remain ourselves at all costs .  we developed suitable robots and weapons to protect our apparently empty surface  and they did the job admirably .  ships came and were destroyed  and stopped coming .  the planet was considered deserted  and was forgotten  as we hoped it would be .    and meanwhile  underground  we worked to solve our problems .  we adjusted our genes gingerly  delicately .  we had failures  but some successes  and we capitalized on the successes .  it took us many centuries  but we finally became whole human beings  incorporating both the masculine and feminine principles in one body  supplying our own complete pleasure at will  and producing  when we wished  fertilized eggs for development under skilled robotic care .     hermaphrodites   said pelorat .    is that what it is called in your language .   asked bander indifferently .   i have never heard the word .     hermaphroditism stops evolution dead in its tracks   said trevize .   each child is the genetic duplicate of its hermaphroditic parent .     come   said bander   you treat evolution as a hit and miss affair .  we can design our children if we wish .  we can change and adjust the genes and  on occasion  we do .   but we are almost at my dwelling .  let us enter .  it grows late in the day .  the sun already fails to give its warmth adequately and we will be more comfortable indoors .    they passed through a door that had no locks of any kind but that opened as they approached and closed behind them as they passed through .  there were no windows  but as they entered a cavernous room  the walls glowed to luminous life and brightened .  the floor seemed bare  but was soft and springy to the touch .  in each of the four corners of the room  a robot stood motionless .    that wall   said bander  pointing to the wall opposite the door a wall that seemed no different in any way from the other three is my visionscreen .  the world opens before me through that screen but it in no way limits my freedom for i cannot be compelled to use it .    trevize said   nor can you compel another to use his if you wish to see him through that screen and he does not .     compel .   said bander haughtily .   let another do as it pleases  if it is but content that i do as i please .  please note that we do not use gendered pronouns in referring to each other .    there was one chair in the room  facing the vision screen  and bander sat down in it .   trevize looked about  as though expecting additional chairs to spring from the floor .   may we sit  too .   he said .    if you wish   said bander .   bliss  smiling  sat down on the floor .  pelorat sat down beside her .  trevize stubbornly continued to stand .   bliss said   tell me  bander  how many human beings live on this planet .     say solarians  half human bliss .  the phrase  human being  is contaminated by the fact that half humans call themselves that .  we might call ourselves whole humans  but that is clumsy .  solarian is the proper term .     how many solarians  then  live on this planet .     i am not certain .  we do not count ourselves .  perhaps twelve hundred .     only twelve hundred on the entire world .     fully twelve hundred .  you count in numbers again  while we count in quality .   nor do you understand freedom .  if one other solarian exists to dispute my absolute mastery over any part of my land  over any robot or living thing or object  my freedom is limited .  since other solarians exist  the limitation on freedom must be removed as far as possible by separating them all to the point where contact is virtually nonexistent .  solaria will hold twelve hundred solarians under conditions approaching the ideal .  add more  and liberty will be palpably limited so that the result will be unendurable .     that means each child must be counted and must balance deaths   said pelorat suddenly .    certainly .  that must be true of any world with a stable population even yours  perhaps .     and since there are probably few deaths  there must therefore be few children .     indeed .    pelorat nodded his head and was silent .   trevize said   what i want to know is how you made my weapons fly through the air .  you haven t explained that .     i offered you sorcery or magic as an explanation .  do you refuse to accept that .     of course i refuse .  what do you take me for .     will you  then  believe in the conservation of energy  and in the necessary increase of entropy .     that i do .  nor can i believe that even in twenty thousand years you have changed these laws  or modified them a micrometer .     nor have we  half person .  but now consider .  outdoors  there is sunlight .   there was its oddly graceful gesture  as though marking out sunlight all about .   and there is shade .  it is warmer in the sunlight than in the shade  and heat flows spontaneously from the sunlit area into the shaded area .     you tell me what i know   said trevize .    but perhaps you know it so well that you no longer think about it .  and at night  solaria s surface is warmer than the objects beyond its atmosphere  so that heat flows spontaneously from the planetary surface into outer space .     i know that  too .     and day or night  the planetary interior is warmer than the planetary surface .  heat therefore flows spontaneously from the interior to the surface .  i imagine you know that  too .     and what of all that  bander .     the flow of heat from hotter to colder  which must take place by the second law of thermodynamics  can be used to do work .     in theory  yes  but sunlight is dilute  the heat of the planetary surface is even more dilute  and the rate at which heat escapes from the interior makes that the most dilute of all .  the amount of heat flow that can be harnessed would probably not be enough to lift a pebble .     it depends on the device you use for the purpose   said bander .   our own tool was developed over a period of thousands of years and it is nothing less than a portion of our brain .    bander lifted the hair on either side of its head  exposing that portion of its skull behind its ears .  it turned its head this way and that  and behind each ear was a bulge the size and shape of the blunt end of a hen s egg .    that portion of my brain  and its absence in you  is what makes the difference between a solarian and you .       .   trevize glanced now and then at bliss s face  which seemed entirely concentrated on bander .  trevize had grown quite certain he knew what was going on .   bander  despite its paean to freedom  found this unique opportunity irresistible .  there was no way it could speak to robots on a basis of intellectual equality  and certainly not to animals .  to speak to its fellow solarians would be  to it  unpleasant  and what communication there must be would be forced  and never spontaneous .   as for trevize  bliss  and pelorat  they might be half human to bander  and it might regard them as no more an infringement on its liberty than a robot or a goat would be but they were its intellectual equals  or near equals  and the chance to speak to them was a unique luxury it had never experienced before .   no wonder  trevize thought  it was indulging itself in this way .  and bliss  trevize was doubly sure  was encouraging this  just pushing bander s mind ever so gently in order to urge it to do what it very much wanted to do in any case .   bliss  presumably  was working on the supposition that if bander spoke enough  it might tell them something useful concerning earth .  that made sense to trevize  so that even if he had not been truly curious about the subject under discussion  he would nevertheless have endeavored to continue the conversation .    what do those brain lobes do .   trevize asked .   bander said   they are transducers .  they are activated by the flow of heat and they convert the heat flow into mechanical energy .     i cannot believe that .  the flow of heat is insufficient .     little half human  you do not think .  if there were many solarians crowded together  each trying to make use of the flow of heat  then  yes  the supply would be insufficient .  i  however  have over forty thousand square kilometers that are mine  mine alone .  i can collect heat flow from any quantity of those square kilometers with no one to dispute me  so the quantity is sufficient .  do you see .     is it that simple to collect heat flow over a wide area .  the mere act of concentration takes a great deal of energy .     perhaps  but i am not aware of it .  my transducer lobes are constantly concentrating heat flow so that as work is needed  work is done .  when i drew your weapons into the air  a particular volume of the sunlit atmosphere lost some of its excess heat to a volume of the shaded area  so that i was using solar energy for the purpose .  instead of using mechanical or electronic devices to bring that about  however  i used a neuronic device .   it touched one of the transducer lobes gently .   it does it quickly  efficiently  constantly and effortlessly .     unbelievable   muttered pelorat .    not at all unbelievable   said bander .   consider the delicacy of the eye and ear .   and how they can turn small quantities of photons and air vibrations into information .  that would seem unbelievable if you had never come across it before .  the transducer lobes are no more unbelievable  and would not be so to you  were they not unfamiliar .    trevize said   what do you do with these constantly operating transducerlobes .     we run our world   said bander .   every robot on this vast estate obtains its energy from me  or  rather  from natural heat flow .  whether a robot is adjusting a contact  or felling a tree  the energy is derived from mental transduction my mental transduction .     and if you are asleep .     the process of transduction continues waking or sleeping  little half human   said bander .   do you cease breathing when you sleep .  does your heart stop beating .  at night  my robots continue working at the cost of cooling solaria s interior a bit .  the change is immeasurably small on a global scale and there are only twelve hundred of us  so that all the energy we use does not appreciably shorten our sun s life or drain the world s internal heat .     has it occurred to you that you might use it as a weapon .    bander stared at trevize as though he were something peculiarly incomprehensible .   i suppose by that   he said   you mean that solaria might confront other worlds with energy weapons based on transduction .  why should we .  even if we could beat their energy weapons based on other principles which is anything but certain what would we gain .  the control of other worlds .  what do we want with other worlds when we have an ideal world of our own .  do we want to establish our domination over half humans and use them in forced labor .  we have our robots that are far better than half humans for the purpose .  we have everything .  we want nothing except to be left to ourselves .  see here i ll tell you another story .     go ahead   said trevize .    twenty thousand years ago when the half creatures of earth began to swarm into space and we ourselves withdrew underground  the other spacer worlds were determined to oppose the new earth settlers .  so they struck at earth .     at earth   said trevize  trying to hide his satisfaction over the fact that the subject had come up at last .    yes  at the center .  a sensible move  in a way .  if you wish to kill a person  you strike not at a finger or a heel  but at the heart .  and our fellow spacers  not too far removed from human beings themselves in passions  managed to set earth s surface radioactively aflame  so that the world became largely uninhabitable .     ah  that s what happened   said pelorat  clenching a fist and moving it rapidly  as though nailing down a thesis .   i knew it could not be a natural phenomenon .  how was it done .     i don t know how it was done   said bander indifferently   and in any case it did the spacers no good .  that is the point of the story .  the settlers continued to swarm and the spacers died out .  they had tried to compete  and vanished .  we solarians retired and refused to compete  and so we are still here .     and so are the settlers   said trevize grimly .    yes  but not forever .  swarmers must fight  must compete  and eventually must die .  that may take tens of thousands of years  but we can wait .  and when it happens  we solarians  whole  solitary  liberated  will have the galaxy to ourselves .  we can then use  or not use  any world we wish to in addition to our own .     but this matter of earth   said pelorat  snapping his fingers impatiently .   is what you tell us legend or history .     how does one tell the difference  half pelorat .   said bander .   all history is legend  more or less .     but what do your records say .  may i see the records on the subject  bander .   please understand that this matter of myths  legends  and primeval history is my field .  i am a scholar dealing with such matters and particularly with those matters as related to earth .     i merely repeat what i have heard   said bander .   there are no records on the subject .  our records deal entirely with solarian affairs and other worlds are mentioned in them only insofar as they impinge upon us .     surely  earth has impinged on you   said pelorat .    that may be  but  if so  it was long  long ago  and earth  of all worlds  was most repulsive to us .  if we had any records of earth  t am sure they were destroyed out of sheer revulsion .    trevize gritted his teeth in chagrin .   by yourselves .   he asked .   bander turned its attention to trevize .   there is no one else to destroy them .    pelorat would not let go of the matter .   what else have you heard concerning earth .    bander thought .  it said   when i was young  i heard a tale from a robot about an earthman who once visited solaria  about a solarian woman who left with him and became an important figure in the galaxy .  that  however  was  in my opinion  an invented tale .    pelorat bit at his lip .   are you sure .     how can i be sure of anything in such matters .   said bander .   still  it passes the bounds of belief that an earthman would dare come to solaria  or that solaria would allow the intrusion .  it is even less likely that a solarian woman we were half humans then  but even so should voluntarily leave this world .   but come  let me show you my home .     your home .   said bliss  looking about .   are we not in your home .     not at all   said bander .   this is an anteroom .  it is a viewing room .  in it i see my fellow solarians when i must .  their images appear on that wall  or three dimensionally in the space before the wall .  this room is a public assembly  therefore  and not part of my home .  come with me    it walked on ahead  without turning to see if it were followed  but the four robots left their corners  and trevize knew that if he and his companions did not follow spontaneously  the robots would gently coerce them into doing so .   the other two got to their feet and trevize whispered lightly to bliss   have you been keeping it talking .    bliss pressed his hand  and nodded .   just the same  i wish i knew what its intentions were   she added  with a note of uneasiness in her voice .      .   they followed bander .  the robots remained at a polite distance  but their presence was a constantly felt threat .   they were moving through a corridor  and trevize mumbled low spiritedly   there s nothing helpful about earth on this planet .  i m sure of it .  just another variation on the radioactivity theme .   he shrugged .   we ll have to go on to the third set of co ordinates .    a door opened before them  revealing a small room .  bander said   come  half humans  i want to show you how we live .    trevize whispered   it gets infantile pleasure out of display .  i d love to knock it down .     don t try to compete in childishness   said bliss .   bander ushered all three into the room .  one of the robots followed as well .  bander gestured the other robots away and entered itself .  the door closed behind it .    it s an elevator   said pelorat  with a pleased air of discovery .    so it is   said bander .   once we went underground  we never truly emerged .  nor would we want to  though i find it pleasant to feel the sunlight on occasion .  i dislike clouds or night in the open  however .  that gives one the sensation of being underground without truly being underground  if you know what i mean .  that is cognitive dissonance  after a fashion  and i find it very unpleasant .     earth built underground   said pelorat .   the caves of steel  they called their cities .  and trantor built underground  too  even more extensively  in the old imperial days .  and comporellon builds underground right now .  it is a common tendency  when you come to think of it .     half humans swarming underground and we living underground in isolated splendor are two widely different things   said bander .   trevize said   on terminus  dwelling places are on the surface .     and exposed to the weather   said bander .   very primitive .    the elevator  after the initial feeling of lower gravity that had given away its nature to pelorat  gave no sensation of motion whatsoever .  trevize was wondering how far down it would penetrate  when there was a brief feeling of higher gravity and the door opened .   before them was a large and elaborately furnished room .  it was dimly lit  though the source of the light was not apparent .  it almost seemed as though the air itself were faintly luminous .   bander pointed its finger and where it pointed the light grew a bit more intense .  it pointed it elsewhere and the same thing happened .  it placed its left hand on a stubby rod to one side of the doorway and  with its right hand  made an expansive circular gesture so that the whole room lit up as though it were in sunlight  but with no sensation of heat .   trevize grimaced and said  half aloud   the man s a charlatan .    bander said sharply .   not  the man   but  the solarian .   i m not sure what the word  charlatan  means  but if i catch the tone of voice  it is opprobrious .    trevize said   it means one who is not genuine  who arranges effects to make what is done seem more impressive than it really is .    bander said   i admit that i love the dramatic  but what i have shown you is not an effect .  it is real .    it tapped the rod on which its left hand was resting .   this heat conducting rod extends several kilometers downward  and there are similar rods in many convenient places throughout my estate .  i know there are similar rods on other estates .  these rods increase the rate at which heat leaves solaria s lower regions for the surface and eases its conversion into work .  i do not need the gestures of the hand to produce the light  but it does lend an air of drama or  perhaps  as you point out  a slight touch of the not genuine  i enjoy that sort of thing .    bliss said   do you have much opportunity to experience the pleasure of such little dramatic touches .     no   said bander  shaking its head .   my robots are not impressed with such things .  nor would my fellow solarians be .  this unusual chance of meeting half humans and displaying for them is most amusing .    pelorat said   the light in this room shone dimly when we entered .  does it  shine dimly at all times .     yes  a small drain of power like keeping  the robots working .  my entire estate is always running  and those parts of it not engaged in active labor are idling .     and you supply the power constantly for all this vast estate .     the sun and the planet s core supply the power .  i am merely the conduit .  nor is all the estate productive .  i keep most of it as wilderness and well stocked with a variety of animal life  first  because that protects my boundaries  and second  because i find esthetic value in it .  in fact  my fields and factories are small .  they need only supply my own needs  plus some specialties to exchange for those of others .  i have robots  for instance  that can manufacture and install the heat conducting rods at need .  many solarians depend upon me for that .     and your home .   asked trevize .   how large is that .    it must have been the right question to ask  for bander beamed .   very large .  one of the largest on the planet  i believe .  it goes on for kilometers in every direction .  i have as many robots caring for my home underground  as i have in all the thousands of square kilometers of surface .     you don t live in all of it  surely   said pelorat .    it might conceivably be that there are chambers i have never entered  but what of that .   said bander .   the robots keep every room clean  well ventilated  and in order .  but come  step out here .    they emerged through a door that was not the one through which they had entered and found themselves in another corridor .  before them was a little topless ground car that ran on tracks .   bander motioned them into it  and one by one they clambered aboard .  there was not quite room for all four  plus the robot  but pelorat and bliss squeezed together tightly to allow room for trevize .  bander sat in the front with an air of easy comfort  the robot at its side  and the car moved along with no sign of overt manipulation of controls other than bander s smooth hand motions now and then .    this is a car shaped robot  actually   said bander  with an air of negligent indifference .     they progressed at a stately pace  very smoothly past doors that opened as they approached  and closed as they receded .  the decorations in each were of widely different kinds as though robots had been ordered to devise combinations at random .   ahead of them the corridor was gloomy  and behind them as well .  at whatever point they actually found themselves  however  they were in the equivalent of cool sunlight .  the rooms  too  would light as the doors opened .  and each time  bander moved its hand slowly and gracefully .   there seemed no end to the journey .  now and then they found themselves curving in a way that made it plain that the underground mansion spread out in two dimensions .   no  three  thought trevize  at one point  as they moved steadily down a shallow declivity .    wherever they went  there were robots  by the dozens  scores hundreds  engaged in unhurried work whose nature trevize could not easily divine .  they passed the open door of one large room in which rows of robots were bent quietly over desks .   pelorat asked   what are they doing  bander .     bookkeeping   said bander .   keeping statistical records  financial accounts  and all sorts of things that  i am very glad to say  i don t have to bother with .  this isn t just an idle estate .  about a quarter of its growing area is given over to orchards .  an additional tenth are grain fields  but it s the orchards that are really my pride .  we grow the best fruit in the world and grow them in the largest number of varieties  too .  a bander peach is the peach on solaria .  hardly anyone else even bothers to grow peaches .  we have twenty seven varieties of apples and and so on .  the robots could give you full information .     what do you do with all the fruit .   asked trevize .   you can t eat it all yourself .     i wouldn t dream of it .  i m only moderately fond of fruit .  it s traded to the other estates .     traded for what .     mineral material mostly .  i have no mines worth mentioning on my estates .  then  too  i trade for whatever is required to maintain a healthy ecological balance .  i have a very large variety of plant and animal life on the estate .     the robots take care of all that  i suppose   said trevize .    they do .  and very well  too .     all for one solarian .     all for the estate and its ecological standards .  i happen to be the only solarian who visits the various parts of the estate when i choose but that is part of my absolute freedom .    pelorat said   i suppose the others the other solarians also maintain a local ecological balance and have marshlands  perhaps  or mountainous areas or seafront estates .    bander said   i suppose so .  such things occupy us in the conferences that world affairs sometimes make necessary .     how often do you have to get together .   asked trevize .   they were going through a rather narrow passageway  quite long  and with no rooms on either side .  trevize guessed that it might have been built through an area that did not easily allow anything wider to be constructed  so that it served as a connecting link between two wings that could each spread out more widely .    too often .  it s a rare month when i don t have to pass some time in conference with one of the committees i am a member of .  still  although i may not have mountains or marshlands on my estate  my orchards  my fishponds  and my botanical gardens are the best in the world .    pelorat said   but  my dear fellow i mean  bander i would assume you have never left your estate and visited those of others     certainly nor    said bander  with an air of outrage .    i said i assumed that   said pelorat mildly .   but in that case  how can you be certain that yours are best  never having investigated  or even seen the others .     because   said bander   i can tell from the demand for my products in interestate trade .    trevize said   what about manufacturing .    bander said   there are estates where they manufacture tools and machinery .  as i said  on my estate we make the heat conducting rods  but those are rather simple .     and robots .     robots are manufactured here and there .  throughout history  solaria has led all the galaxy in the cleverness and subtlety of robot design .     today also  i imagine   said trevize  carefully having the intonation make the remark a statement and not a question .   bander said   today .  with whom is there to compete today .  only solaria makes robots nowadays .  your worlds do not  if i interpret what i hear on the hyperwave correctly .     but the other spacer worlds .     i told you .  they no longer exist .     at all .     i don t think there is a spacer alive anywhere but on solaria .     then is there no one who knows the location of earth .     why would anyone want to know the location of earth .    pelorat broke in   i want to know .  it s my field of study .     then   said bander   you will have to study something else .  i know nothing about the location of earth  nor have i heard of anyone who ever did  nor do i care a sliver of robot metal about the matter .    the car came to a halt  and  for a moment  trevize thought that bander was offended .  the halt was a smooth one  however  and bander  getting out of the car  looked its usual amused self as it motioned the others to get out also .   the lighting in the room they entered was subdued  even after bander had brightened it with a gesture .  it opened into a side corridor  on both sides of which were smaller rooms .  in each one of the smaller rooms was one or two ornate vases  sometimes flanked by objects that might have been film projectors .    what is all this  bander .   asked trevize .   bander said   the ancestral death chambers  trevize .       .   pelorat looked about with interest .   i suppose you have the ashes of your ancestors interred here .     if you mean by  interred    said bander   buried in the ground  you are not quite right .  we may be underground  but this is my mansion  and the ashes are in it  as we are right now .  in our own language we say that the ashes are  inhoused .     it hesitated  then said     house  is an archaic word for  mansion .      trevize looked about him perfunctorily .   and these are all your ancestors .  how many .     nearly a hundred   said bander  making no effort to hide the pride in its voice .   ninety four  to be exact .  of course  the earliest are not true solarians  not in the present sense of the word .  they were half people  masculine and feminine .  such half ancestors were placed in adjoining urns by their immediate descendants .  i don t go into those rooms  of course .  it s rather  shamiferous .   at least  that s the solarian word for it  but i don t know your galactic equivalent .  you may not have one .     and the films .   asked bliss .   i take it those are film projectors .         diaries   said bander   the history of their lives .  scenes of themselves in their favorite parts of the estate .  it means they do not die in every sense .  part of them remains  and it is part of my freedom that i can join them whenever i choose  i can watch this bit of film or that  as i please .     but not into the  shamiferous ones .    bander s eyes slithered away .   no   it admitted   but then we all have that as part of the ancestry .  it is a common wretchedness .     common .  then other solarians also have these death chambers .   asked trevize .    oh yes  we all do  but mine is the best  the most elaborate  the most perfectly preserved .    trevize said   do you have your own death chamber already prepared .     certainly .  it is completely constructed and appointed .  that was done as my first duty when i inherited the estate .  and when i am laid to ash to be poetic my successor will go about the construction of its own as its first duty .     and do you have a successor .     i will have when the time comes .  there is as yet ample scope for life .  when i must leave  there will be an adult successor  ripe enough to enjoy the estate  and well lobed for power transduction .     it will be your offspring  i imagine .     .  . oh yes .     but what if   said trevize   something untoward takes place .  i presume accidents and misfortunes take place even on solaria .  what happens if a solarian is laid to ash prematurely and it has no successor to take its place  or at least not one who is ripe enough to enjoy the estate .     that rarely happens .  in my line of ancestors  that happened only once .  when it does  however  one need only remember that there are other successors waiting for other estates .  some of those are old enough to inherit  and yet have parents who are young enough to produce a second descendant and to live on till that second descendant is ripe enough for the succession .  one of these old young successors  as they are called  would be assigned to the succession of my estate .     who does the assigning .     we have a ruling board that has this as one of its few functions the assignment of a successor in case of premature aching .  it is all done by holovision  of course .    pelorat said   hut see here  if solarians never see each other  how would anyone know that some solarian somewhere has unexpectedly or expectedly  for that matter been laid to ash .    bander said   when one of us is laid to ash  all power at the estate ceases .  if no successor takes over at once  the abnormal situation is eventually noticed and corrective measures are taken .  i assure you that our social system works smoothly .    trevize said   would it be possible to view some of these films you have here .    bander froze .  then it said   it is only your ignorance that excuses you .  what you have said is crude and obscene .     i apologize for that   said trevize .   i do not wish to intrude on you  but we ve already explained that we are very interested in obtaining information on earth .  it occurs to me that the earliest films you have would date back to a time before earth was radioactive .  earth might therefore be mentioned .  there might be details given about it .  we certainly do not wish to intrude on your privacy  but would there be any way in which you yourself could explore those films  or have a robot do so  perhaps  and then allow any relevant information to be passed on to us .  of course  if you can respect our motives and understand that we will try our best to respect your feelings in return  you might allow us to do the viewing ourselves .    bander said frigidly   i imagine you have no way of knowing that you are becoming more and more offensive .  however  we can end all this at once  for i can tell you that there are no films accompanying my early half human ancestors .     none .   trevize s disappointment was heart felt .    they existed once .  but even you can imagine what might have been on them .  two half humans showing interest in each other or  even   hander cleared its throat  and said  with an effort   interacting .  naturally  all halfhuman films were destroyed many generations ago .     what about the records of other solarians .     all destroyed .     can you be sure .     it would be mad not to destroy them .     it might be that some solarians were mad  or sentimental  or forgetful .  we presume you will not object to directing us to neighboring estates .    bander looked at trevize in surprise .   do you suppose others will be as tolerant of you as i have been .     why not  bander .     you ll find they won t be .     it s a chance we ll have to take .     no  trevize .  no  any of you .  listen to me .    there were robots in the background  and bander was frowning .    what is it  bander .   said trevize  suddenly uneasy .   bander said   i have enjoyed speaking to all of you  and observing you in all your strangeness .  it was a unique experience  which i have been delighted with  but i cannot record it in my diary  nor memorialize it in film .     why not .     my speaking to you  my listening to you  my bringing you into my mansion  my bringing you here into the ancestral death chambers  are shameful acts .     we are not solarians .  we matter to you as little as these robots do  do we not .     i excuse the matter to myself in that way .  it may not serve as an excuse to others .     what do you care .  you have absolute liberty to do as you choose  don t you .     even as we are  freedom is not truly absolute .  if i were the only solarian on the planet  i could do even shameful things in absolute freedom .  but there are other solarians on the planet  and  because of that  ideal freedom  though approached  is not actually reached .  there are twelve hundred solarians on the planet who would despise me if they knew what i had done .     there is no reason they need know about it .     that is true .  i have been aware of that since you ve arrived .  i ve been aware of it all this time that i ve been amusing myself with you .  the others must not find out .    pelorat said   if that means you fear complications as a result of our visits to other estates in search of information about earth  why  naturally  we will mention nothing of having visited you first .  that is clearly understood .    bander shook its head .   i have taken enough chances .  i will not speak of this  of course .  my robots will not speak of this  and will even be instructed not to remember it .  your ship will be taken underground and explores for what information it can give us      wait   said trevize   how long do you suppose we can wait here while you inspect our ship .  that is impossible .     not at all impossible  for you will have nothing to say about it .  i am sorry .  i would like to speak to you longer and to discuss many other things with you  but you see the matter grows more dangerous .     no  it does not   said trevize emphatically .    yes  it does  little half human .  i m afraid the time has come when i must do what my ancestors would have done at once .  i must kill you  all three .      chapter       to the surface     .   trevize turned his head at once to look at bliss .  her face was expressionless  but taut  and her eyes were fixed on bander with an intensity that made her seem oblivious  to all else .   pelorat s eyes were wide  disbelieving .   trevize  not knowing what bliss would or could do  struggled to fight down an overwhelming sense of loss  not so much at the thought of dying  as of dying without knowing where earth was  without knowing why he had chosen gaia as humanity s future  .  he had to play for time .   he said  striving to keep his voice steady  and his words clear   you have shown yourself a courteous and gentle solarian  bander .  you have not grown angry at our intrusion into your world .  you have been kind enough to show us over your estate and mansion  and you have answered our questions .  it would suit your character better to allow us to leave now .  no one need ever know we were on this world and we would have no cause to return .  we arrived in all innocence  seeking merely information .     what you say is so   said bander lightly   and  so far  i have given you life .  your lives were forfeit the instant you entered our atmosphere .  what i might have done and should have done on making close contact with you  would be to have killed you at once .  i should then have ordered the appropriate robot to dissect your bodies for what information on outworlders that might yield me .    i have not done that .  i have pampered my own curiosity and given in to my own easygoing nature  but it is enough .  i can do it no longer .  i have  in fact  already compromised the safety of solaria  for if  through some weakness  i were to let myself be persuaded to let you go  others of your kind would surely follow  however much you might promise that they would not .    there is  however  at least this .  your death will be painless .  i will merely heat your brains mildly and drive them into inactivation .  you will experience no pain .  life will merely cease .  eventually  when dissection and study are over  i will convert you to ashes in an intense flash of heat and all will be over .    trevize said   if we must die  then i cannot argue against a quick painless death  but why must we die at all  having given no offense .     your arrival was an offense .     not on any rational ground  since we could not know it was an offense .         society defines what constitutes an offense .  to you  it may seem irrational and arbitrary  but to us it is not  and this is our world on which we have the full right to say that in this and that  you have done wrong and deserve to die .      bander smiled as though it were merely making pleasant conversation and went on   nor have you any right to complain on the ground of your own superior virtue .  you have a blaster which uses a beam of microwaves to induce intense killing heat .  it does what i intend to do  but does it  i am sure  much more crudely and painfully .  you would have no hesitation in using it on me right now  had i not drained its energy  and if i were to be so foolish as to allow you the freedom of movement that would enable you to remove the weapon from its holster .    trevize said despairingly  afraid even to glance again at bliss  lest bander s attention be diverted to her   i ask you  as an act of mercy  not to do this .    bandar said  turning suddenly grim   i must first be merciful to myself and to my world  and to do that  you must die .    he raised his hand and instantly darkness descended upon trevize .      .   for a moment  trevize felt the darkness choking him and thought wildly  is this death .   and as though his thoughts had given rise to an echo  he heard a whispered   is this death .   it was pelorat s voice .   trevize tried to whisper  and found he could .   why ask .   he said  with a sense of vast relief .   the mere fact that you can ask shows it is not death .     mere are old legends that there is life after death .     nonsense   muttered trevize .   bliss .  are you here  bliss .    there was no answer to that .   again pelorat echoed   bliss .  bliss .  what happened  golan .    trevize said   bender must be dead .  he would  in that case  be unable to supply the power for his estate .  the lights would go out .     but how could .  you mean bliss did it .     i suppose so .  i hope she did not come to harm in the process .   he was on his hands and knees crawling about in the total darkness of the underground  if one did not count the occasional subvisible flashing of a radioactive atom breaking down in the walls  .   then his hand came on something warm and soft .  he felt along it and recognized a leg  which he seized .  it was clearly too small to be bander s .   bliss .    the leg kicked out  forcing trevize to let go .   he said   bliss .  say something .     i am alive   came bliss s voice  curiously distorted .   trevize said   but are you well .     no .   and  with that  light returned to their surroundings weakly .  the walls gleamed faintly  brightening and dimming erratically .   bander lay crumpled in a shadowy heap .  at its side  holding its head  was bliss .   she looked up at trevize and pelorat .   the solarian is dead   she said  and her cheeks glistened with tears in the weak light .   trevize was dumbfounded .   why are you crying .     should i not cry at having killed a living thing of thought and intelligence .  that was not my intention .    trevize leaned down to help her to her feet  but she pushed him away .   pelorat knelt in his turn  saying softly   please  bliss  even you can t bring it back to life .  tell us what happened .    she allowed herself to be pulled upward and said dully   gaia can do what bander could do .  gaia can make use of the unevenly distributed energy of the universe and translate it into chosen work by mental power alone .     i knew that   said trevize  attempting to be soothing without quite knowing how to go about it .   i remember well our meeting in space when you or gaia  rather held our spaceship captive .  i thought of that when bander held me captive after it had taken my weapons .  it held you captive  too  but i was confident you could have broken free if you had wished .     no .  i would have failed if i had tried .  when your ship was in my our  gaia s grip   she said sadly   i and gaia were truly one .  now there is a hyperspatial separation that limits my our gaia s efficiency .  besides  gaia does what it does by the sheer power of massed brains .  even so  all those brains together lack the transducer lobes this one solarian has .  we cannot make use of energy as delicately  as efficiently  as tirelessly as he could .   you see that i cannot make the lights gleam more brightly  and i don t know how long i can make them gleam at all before tiring .  bander could supply the power for an entire vast estate  even when it was sleeping .     but you stopped it   said trevize .    because it didn t suspect my powers   said bliss   and because i did nothing that would give it evidence of them .  it was therefore without suspicion of me and gave me none of its attention .  it concentrated entirely on you  trevize  because it was you who bore the weapons again  how well it has served that you armed yourself and i had to wait my chance to stop hander with one quick and unexpected blow .  when it was on the point of killing us  when its whole mind was concentrated on that  and on you  i was able to strike .     and it worked beautifully .     how can you say something so cruel  trevize .  it was only my intention to stop it .  i merely wished to block its use of its transducer .  in the moment of surprise when it tried to blast us and found it could not  but found  instead  that the very illumination about us was fading into darkness  i would tighten my grip and send it into a prolonged normal sleep and release the transducer .  the power would then remain on  and we could get out of this mansion  into our ship  and leave the planet .  i hoped to so arrange things that  when bander finally woke  it would have forgotten all that had happened from the instant of its sighting us .  gaia has no desire to kill in order to accomplish what can be brought about without killing .     what went wrong  bliss .   said pelorat softly .    i had never encountered any such thing as those transducer lobes and i lacked any time to work with them and learn about them .  i merely struck out forcefully with my blocking maneuver and  apparently  it didn t work correctly .  it was not the entry of energy into the lobes that was blocked  but the exit of that energy .  energy is always pouring into those lobes at a reckless rate but  ordinarily  the brain safeguards itself by pouring out that energy just as quickly .  once i blocked the exit  however  energy piled up within the lobes at once and  in a tiny fraction of a second  the temperature had risen to the point where the brain protein inactivated explosively and it was dead .  the lights went out and i removed my block immediately  but  of course  it was too late .     i don t see that you could have done anything other than that which you did  dear   said pelorat .    of what comfort is that  considering that i have killed .     bander was on the point of killing us   said trevize .    that was cause for stopping it  not for killing it .    trevize hesitated .  he did not wish to show the impatience he felt for he was unwilling to offend or further upset bliss  who was  after all  their only defense against a supremely hostile world .   he said   bliss  it is time to look beyond bander s death .  because it is dead  all power on the estate is blanked out .  this will be noticed  sooner or later  probably sooner  by other solarians .  they will be forced to investigate .  i don t think you will be able to hold off the perhaps combined attack of several .  and  as you have admitted yourself  you won t be able to supply for very long the limited power you are managing to supply now .  it is important  therefore  that we get back to the surface  and to our ship  without delay .     but  golan   said pelorat   how do we do that .  we came for many kilometers along a winding path .  i imagine it s quite a maze down here and  for myself  i haven t the faintest idea of where to go to reach the surface .  i ve always had a poor sense of direction .    trevize  looking about  realized that pelorat was correct .  he said   i imagine there are many openings to the surface  and we needn t find the one we entered .     but we don t know where any of the openings are .  how do we find them .    trevize turned again to bliss .   can you detect anything .  mentally  that will help us find our way out .    bliss said   the robots on this estate are all inactive .  i can detect a thin whisper of subintelligent life straight up  but all that tells us is that the surface is straight up  which we know .     well  then   said trevize   we ll just have to look for some opening .     hit and miss   said pelorat  appalled .   we ll never succeed .     we might  janov   said trevize .   if we search  there will be a chance  however small .  the alternative is simply to stay here  and if we do that then we will never succeed .  come  a small chance is better than none .     wait   said bliss .   i do sense something .     what .   said trevize .    a mind .     intelligence .     yes  but limited  i think .  what reaches me most clearly  though  is something else .     what .   said trevize  again fighting impatience .    fright .  intolerable fright .   said bliss  in a whisper .      .   trevize looked about ruefully .  he knew where they had entered but he had no illusion on the score of being able to retrace the path by which they had come .  he had  after all  paid little attention to the turnings and windings .  who would have thought they d be in the position of having to retrace the route alone and without help  and with only a flickering  dim light to be guided by .   he said   do you think you can activate the car  bliss .    bliss said   i m sure i could  trevize  but that doesn t mean i can run it .    pelorat said   i think that bander ran it mentally .  i didn t see it touch anything when it was moving .    bliss said gently   yes  it did it mentally  pel  but how  mentally .  you might as well say that it did it by using the controls .  certainly  but if i don t know the details of using the controls  that doesn t help  does it .     you might try   said trevize .    if i try  i ll have to put my whole mind to it  and if i do that  then i doubt that i ll be able to keep the lights on .  the car will do us no good in the dark even if i learn how to control it .     then we must wander about on foot  i suppose .     i m afraid so .    trevize peered at the thick and gloomy darkness that lay beyond the dim light in their immediate neighborhood .  he saw nothing  heard nothing .   he said   bliss  do you still sense this frightened mind .     yes  i do .     can you tell where it is .  can you guide us to it .     the mental sense is a straight line .  it is not refracted sensibly by ordinary matter  so i can tell it is coming from that direction .    she pointed to a spot on the dusky wall  and said   but we can t walk through the wall to it .  the best we can do is follow the corridors and try to find our way in whatever direction will keep the sensation growing stronger .  in short  we will have to play the game of hot and cold .     then let s start right now .    pelorat hung back .   wait  golan  are we sure we want to find this thing  whatever it is .  if it is frightened  it may be that we will have reason to be frightened  too .    trevize shook his head impatiently .   we have no choice  janov .  it s a mind  frightened or not  and it may be willing to or may be made to direct us to the surface .     and do we just leave bander lying here .   said pelorat uneasily .   trevize took his elbow .   come  janov .  we have no choice in that  either .  eventually some solarian will reactivate the place  and a robot will find bander and take care of it i hope not before we are safely away .    he allowed bliss to lead the way .  the light was always strongest in her immediate neighborhood and she paused at each doorway  at each fork in the corridor  trying to sense the direction from which the fright came .  sometimes she would walk through a door  or move around a curve  then come back and try an alternate path  while trevize watched helplessly .   each time bliss came to a decision and moved firmly in a particular direction  the light came on ahead of her .  trevize noticed that it seemed a bit brighter now either because his eyes were adapting to the dimness  or because bliss was learning how to handle the transduction more efficiently .  at one point  when she passed one of the metal rods that were inserted into the ground  she put her hand on it and the lights brightened noticeably .  she nodded her head as though she were pleased with herself .   nothing looked in the least familiar  it seemed certain they were wandering through portions of the rambling underground mansion they had not passed through on the way in .    trevize kept looking for corridors that led upward sharply  and he varied that by studying the ceilings for any sign of a trapdoor .  nothing of the sort appeared  and the frightened mind remained their only chance of getting out .   they walked through silence  except for the sound of their own steps  through darkness  except for the light in their immediate vicinity  through death  except for their own lives .  occasionally  they made out the shadowy bulk of a robot  sitting or standing in the dusk  with no motion .  once they saw a robot lying on its side  with legs and arms in queer frozen positions .  it had been caught off balance  trevize thought  at the moment when power had been turned off  and it had fallen .  bander  either alive or dead  could not affect the force of gravity .  perhaps all over the vast bander estate  robots were standing and lying inactive and it would be that that would quickly be noted at the borders .   or perhaps not  he thought suddenly .  solarians would know when one of their number would be dying of old age and physical decay .  the world would be alerted and ready .  bander  however  had died suddenly  without possible foreknowledge  in the prime of its existence .  who would know .  who would expect .  who would be watching for inactivation .   but no  and trevize thrust back optimism and consolation as dangerous lures into overconfidence  .  the solarians would note the cessation of all activity on the bander estate and take action at once .  they all had too great an interest in the succession to estates to leave death to itself .   pelorat murmured unhappily   ventilation has stopped .  a place like this  underground  must be ventilated  and bander supplied the power .  now it has stopped .     it doesn t matter  janov   said trevize .   we ve got enough air down in this empty underground place to last us for years .     it s close just the same .  it s psychologically bad .     please  janov  don t get claustrophobic .   bliss  are we any closer .     much  trevize   she replied .   the sensation is stronger and i am clearer as to its location .    she was stepping forward more surely  hesitating less at points of choice of direction .    there .  there .   she said .   i can sense it intensely .    trevize said dryly   even i can hear it now .    all three stopped and  automatically  held their breaths .  they could hear a soft moaning  interspersed with gasping sobs .   they walked into a large room and  as the lights went on  they saw that  unlike all those they had hitherto seen  it was rich and colorful in furnishings .   in the center of the room was a robot  stooping slightly  its arms stretched out in what seemed an almost affectionate gesture and  of course  it was absolutely motionless .   behind the robot was a flutter of garments .  a round frightened eye edged to one side of it  and there was still the sound of a brokenhearted sobbing .   trevize darted around the robot and  from the other side  a small figure shot out  shrieking .  it stumbled  fell to the ground  and lay there  covering its eyes  kicking its legs in all directions  as though to ward off some threat from whatever angle it might approach  and shrieking  shrieking bliss said  quite unnecessarily   it s a child .       .   trevize drew back  puzzled .  what was a child doing here .  bander had been so proud of its absolute solitude  so insistent upon it .   pelorat  less apt to fall back on iron reasoning in the face of an obscure event  seized upon the solution at once  and said   i suppose this is the successor .     bander s child   said bliss  agreeing   but too young  i think  to be a successor .  the solarians will have to find one elsewhere .    she was gazing at the child  not in a fixed glare  but in a soft  mesmerizing way  and slowly the noise the child was making lessened .  it opened its eyes and looked at bliss in return .  its outcry was reduced to an occasional soft whimper .   bliss made sounds of her own  now  soothing ones  broken words that made little sense in themselves but were meant only to reinforce the calming effect of her thoughts .  it was as though she were mentally fingering the child s unfamiliar mind and seeking to even out its disheveled emotions .   slowly  never taking its eyes off bliss  the child got to its feet  stood there swaying a moment  then made a dash for the silent  frozen robot .  it threw its arms about the sturdy robotic leg as though avid for the security of its touch .   trevize said   i suppose that the robot is its nursemaid or caretaker .  i suppose a solarian can t care for another solarian  not even a parent for a child .    pelorat said   and i suppose the child is hermaphroditic .     it would have to be   said trevize .   bliss  still entirely preoccupied with the child  was approaching it slowly  hands held half upward  palms toward herself  as though emphasizing that there was no intention of seizing the small creature .  the child was now silent  watching the approach  and holding on the more tightly to the robot .   bliss said   there  child warm  child soft  warm  comfortable  safe  child  safe safe .    she stopped and  without looking round  said in a low voice   pel  speak to it in its language .  tell it we re robots come to take care of it because the power failed .     robots .   said pelorat  shocked .    we must be presented as robots .  it s not afraid of robots .  and it s never seen a human being  maybe can t even conceive of them .    pelorat said   i don t know if i can think of the right expression .  i don t know the archaic word for  robot .       say  robot   then  pel .  if that doesn t work  say  iron thing .   say whatever you can .    slowly  word by word  pelorat spoke archaically .  the child looked at him  frowning intensely  as though trying to understand .   trevize said   you might as well ask it how to get out  while you re at it .    bliss said   no .  not yet .  confidence first  then information .    the child  looking now at pelorat  slowly released its hold on the robot and spoke in a high pitched musical voice .   pelorat said anxiously   it s speaking too quickly for me .    bliss said   ask it to repeat more slowly .  i m doing my best to calm it and remove its fears .    pelorat  listening again to the child  said   i think it s asking what made jemby stop .  jemby must be the robot .     check and make sure  pel .    pelorat spoke  then listened  and said   yes  jemby is the robot .  the child calls itself fallom .     good .   bliss smiled at the child  a luminous  happy smile  pointed to it  and said   fallom .  good fallom .  brave fallom .   she placed a hand on her chest and said   bliss .    the child smiled .  it looked very attractive when it smiled .   bliss   it said  hissing the  s  a bit imperfectly .   trevize said   bliss  if you can activate the robot  jemby  it might be able to tell us what we want to know .  pelorat can speak to it as easily as to the child .     no   said bliss .   that would be wrong .  the robot s first duty is to protect the child .  if it is activated and instantly becomes aware of us  aware of strange human beings  it may as instantly attack us .  no strange human beings belong here .  if i am then forced to inactivate it  it can give us no information  and the child  faced with a second inactivation of the only parent it knows well  i just won t do it .     but we were told   said pelorat mildly   that robots can t harm human beings .     so we were   said bliss   but we were not told what kind of robots these solarians have designed .  and even if this robot were designed to do no harm  it would have to make a choice between its child  or the nearest thing to a child it can have  and three objects whom it might not even recognize as human beings  merely as illegal intruders .  naturally  it would choose the child and attack us .    she turned to the child again .   fallow   she said   bliss .   she pointed   pel trev .     pel .  trev   said the child obediently .   she came closer to the child  her hands reaching toward it slowly .  it watched her  then took a step backward .    calm  fallom   said bliss .   good  fallom .  touch  fallom .  nice  fallom .    it took a step toward her  and bliss sighed .   good  fallom .    she touched fallom s bare arm  for it wore  as its parent had  only a long robe  open in front  and with a loincloth beneath .  the touch was gentle .  she removed her arm  waited  and made contact again  stroking softly .   the child s eyes half closed under the strong  calming effect of bliss s mind .   bliss s hands moved up slowly  softly  scarcely touching  to the child s shoulders  its neck  its ears  then under its long brown hair to a point just above and behind its ears .   her hands dropped away then  and she said   the transducer lobes are still small .  the cranial bone hasn t developed yet .  there s just a tough layer of skin there  which will eventually expand outward and be fenced in with bone after the lobes have fully grown .   which means it can t  at the present time  control the estate or even activate its own personal robot .   ask it how old it is  pel .    pelorat said  after an exchange   it s fourteen years old  if i understand it rightly .    trevize said   it looks more like eleven .    bliss said   the length of the years used on this world may not correspond closely to standard galactic years .  besides  spacers are supposed to have extended lifetimes and  if the solarians are like the other spacers in this  they may also have extended developmental periods .  we can t go by years  after all .    trevize said  with an impatient click of his tongue   enough anthropology .  we must get to the surface and since we are dealing with a child  we may be wasting our time uselessly .  it may not know the route to the surface .  it may not ever have been on the surface .    bliss said   pel .    pelorat knew what she meant and there followed the longest conversation he had yet had with fallom .   finally  he said   the child knows what the sun is .  it says it s seen it .  i think it s seen trees .  it didn t act as though it were sure what the word meant  or at least what the word i used meant     yes  janov   said trevize   but do get to the point .     i told fallow that if it could get us out to the surface  that might make it possible for us to activate the robot .  actually  i said we would activate the robot .  do you suppose we might .    trevize said   we ll worry about that later .  did it say it would guide us .     yes .  i thought the child would be more anxious to do it  you see  if i made that promise .  i suppose we re running the risk of disappointing it     come   said trevize   let s get started .  all this will be academic if we are caught underground .    pelorat said something to the child  who began to walk  then stopped and looked back at bliss .   bliss held out her hand and the two then walked hand in hand .    i m the new robot   she said  smiling slightly .    it seems reasonably happy over that   said trevize .   fallom skipped along and  briefly  trevize wondered if it were happy simply because bliss had labored to make it so  or if  added to that  there was the excitement of visiting the surface and of having three new robots  or whether it was excitement at the thought of having its jemby foster parent back .  not that it mattered as long as the child led them .   there seemed no hesitation in the child s progress .  it turned without pause whenever there was a choice of paths .  did it really know where it was going  or was it all simply a matter of a child s indifference .  was it simply playing a game with no clear end in sight .   but trevize was aware  from the slight burden on his progress  that he was moving uphill  and the child  bouncing self importantly forward  was pointing ahead and chattering .   trevize looked at pelorat  who cleared his throat and said   i think what it s saying is  doorway .      i hope your thought is correct   said trevize .   the child broke away from bliss  and was running now .  it pointed to a portion of the flooring that seemed darker than the sections immediately neighboring it .  the child stepped on it  jumping up and down a few times  and then turned with a clear expression of dismay  and spoke with shrill volubility .   bliss said  with a grimace   i ll have to supply the power .   this is wearing me out .    her face reddened a bit and the lights dimmed  but a door opened just ahead of fallom  who laughed in soprano delight .   the child ran out the door and the two men followed .  bliss came last  and looked back as the lights just inside darkened and the door closed .  she then paused to catch her breath  looking rather worn out .    well   said pelorat   we re out .  where s the ship .    all of them stood bathed in the still luminous twilight .   trevize muttered   it seems to me that it was in that direction .     it seems so to me  too   said bliss .   let s walk   and she held out her hand to fallom .   there was no sound except those produced by the wind and by the motions and calls of living animals .  at one point they passed a robot standing motionless near the base of a tree  holding some object of uncertain purpose .   pelorat took a step toward it out of apparent curiosity  but trevize said   not our business  janov .  move on .    they passed another robot  at a greater distance  who had tumbled .   trevize said   there are robots littered over many kilometers in all directions  i suppose .   and then  triumphantly   ah  there s the ship .    they hastened their steps now  then stopped suddenly .  fallow raised its voice in an excited squeak .   on the ground near the ship was what appeared to be an air vessel of primitive design  with a rotor that looked energy wasteful  and fragile besides .  standing next to the air vessel  and between the little party of outworlders and their ship  stood four human figures .    too late   said trevize .   we wasted too much time .  now what .    pelorat said wonderingly   four solarians  it can t be .  surely they wouldn t come into physical contact like that .  do you suppose those are holoimages .     they are thoroughly material   said bliss .   i m sure of that .  they re not solarians either .  there s no mistaking the minds .  they re robots .       .    well  then   said trevize wearily   onward .   he resumed his walk toward the ship at a calm pace and the others followed .   pelorat said  rather breathlessly   what do you intend to do .     if they re robots  they ve got to obey orders .    the robots were awaiting them  and trevize watched them narrowly as they came closer .   yes  they must be robots .  their faces  which looked as though they were made of skin underlain with flesh  were curiously expressionless .  they were dressed in uniforms that exposed no square centimeter of skin outside the face .  even the hands were covered by thin  opaque gloves .   trevize gestured casually  in a fashion that was unquestionably a brusque request that they step aside .   the robots did not move .   in a low voice  trevize said to pelorat   put it into words  janov .  be firm .    pelorat cleared his throat and  putting an unaccustomed baritone into his voice  spoke slowly  gesturing them aside much as trevize had done .  at that  one of the robots  who was perhaps a shade taller than the rest  said something in a cold and incisive voice .   pelorat turned to trevize .   i think he said we were outworlders .     tell him we are human beings and must be obeyed .    the robot spoke then  in peculiar but understandable galactic .   i understand you  outworlder .  i speak galactic .  we are guardian robots .     then you have heard me say that we are human beings and that you must therefore obey us .     we are programmed to obey rulers only  outworlder .  you are not rulers and not solarian .  ruler bander has not responded to the normal moment of contact and we have come to investigate at close quarters .  it is our duty to do so .  we find a spaceship not of solarian manufacture  several outworlders present  and all bander robots inactivated .  where is ruler bander .    trevize shook his head and said slowly and distinctly   we know nothing of what you say .  our ship s computer is not working well .  we found ourselves near this strange planet against our intentions .  we landed to find our location .  we found all robots inactivated .  we know nothing of what might have happened .     that is not a credible account .  if all robots on the estate are inactivated and all power is off  ruler bander must be dead .  it is not logical to suppose that by coincidence it died just as you landed .  there must be some sort of causal connection .    trevize said  with no set purpose but to confuse the issue and to indicate his own foreigner s lack of understanding and  therefore  his innocence   but the power is not off .  you and the others are active .    the robot said   we are guardian robots .  we do not belong to any ruler .  we belong to all the world .  we are not ruler controlled but are nuclearpowered .  i ask again  where is ruler bander .    trevize looked about him .  pelorat appeared anxious  bliss was tight lipped but calm .  fallom was trembling  but bliss s hand touched the child s shoulder and it stiffened somewhat and lost facial expression .   was bliss sedating it .    the robot said   once again  and for the last time  where is ruler bander .     i do not know   said trevize grimly .   the robot nodded and two of his companions left quickly .  the robot said   my fellow guardians will search the mansion .  meanwhile  you will be held for questioning .  hand me those objects you wear at your side .    trevize took a step backward .   they are harmless .     do not move again .  i do not question their nature  whether harmful or harmless .  i ask for them .     no .    the robot took a quick step forward  and his arm flashed out too quickly for trevize to realize what was happening .  the robot s hand was on his shoulder  the grip tightened and pushed downward .  trevize went to his knees .   the robot said   those objects .   it held out its other hand .    no   gasped trevize .   bliss lunged forward  pulled the blaster out of its holster before trevize  clamped in the robot s grip  could do anything to prevent her  and held it out toward the robot .   here  guardian   she said   and if you ll give me a moment here s the other .  now release my companion .    the robot  holding both weapons  stepped back  and trevize rose slowly to his feet  rubbing his left shoulder vigorously  face wincing with pain .    fallow whimpered softly  and pelorat picked it up in distraction  and held it tightly .    bliss said to trevize  in a furious whisper   why are you fighting him .  he can kill you with two fingers .    trevize groaned and said  between gritted teeth   why don t you handle him .    i m trying to .  it takes time .  his mind is tight  intensely programmed  and leaves no handle .  i must study it .  you play for time .     don t study his mind .  just destroy it   said trevize  almost soundlessly .   bliss looked quickly toward the robot .  it was studying the weapons intently  while the one other robot that still remained with it watched the outworlders .  neither seemed interested in the whispering that was going on between trevize and bliss .   bliss said   no .  no destruction .  we killed one dog and hurt another on the first world .  you know what happened on this world .    another quick glance at the guardian robots .    gaia does not needlessly butcher life or intelligence .  i need time to work it out peacefully .    she stepped back and stared at the robot fixedly .   the robot said   these are weapons .     no   said trevize .    yes   said bliss   but they are no longer useful .  they are drained of energy .     is that indeed so .  why should you carry weapons that are drained of energy .  perhaps they are not drained .   the robot held one of the weapons in its fist and placed its thumb accurately .   is this the way it is activated .     yes   said bliss   if you tighten the pressure  it would be activated  if it contained energy but it does not .     is that certain .   the robot pointed the weapon at trevize .   do you still say that if i activate it now  it will not work .     it will not work   said bliss .   trevize was frozen in place and unable to articulate .  he had tested the blaster after hander had drained it and it was totally dead  but the robot was holding the neuronic whip .  trevize had not tested that .   if the whip contained even a small residue of energy  there would be enough for a stimulation of the pain nerves  and what trevize would feel would make the grip of the robot s hand seem to have been a pat of affection .   when he had been at the naval academy  trevize had been forced to take a mild neuronic whipblow  as all cadets had had to .  that was just to know what it was like .  trevize felt no need to know anything more .   the robot activated the weapon and  for a moment  trevize stiffened painfully and then slowly relaxed .  the whip  too  was thoroughly drained .   the robot stared at trevize and then tossed both weapons to one side .   how do these come to be drained of energy .   it demanded .   if they are of no use  why do you carry them .    trevize said   i am accustomed to the weight and carry them even when drained .    the robot said   that does not make sense .  you are all under custody .  you will be held for further questioning  and  if the rulers so decide  you will then be inactivated .   how does one open this ship .  we must search it .     it will do you no good   said trevize .   you won t understand it .     if not i  the rulers will understand .     they will not understand  either .     then you will explain so that they will understand .     i will not .     then you will be inactivated .     my inactivation will give you no explanation  and i think i will be inactivated even if i explain .    bliss muttered   keep it up .  i m beginning to unravel the workings of its brain .    the robot ignored bliss .   did she see to that .  thought trevize  and hoped savagely that she had .    keeping its attention firmly on trevize  the robot said   if you make difficulties  then we will partially inactivate you .  we will damage you and you will then tell us what we want to know .    suddenly  pelorat called out in a half strangled cry .   wait  you cannot do this .   guardian  you cannot do this .     i am under detailed instructions   said the robot quietly .   i can do this .  of course  i shall do as little damage as is consistent with obtaining information .     but you cannot .  not at all .  i am an outworlder  and so are these two companions of mine .  but this child   and pelorat looked at fallom  whom he was still carrying   is a solarian .  it will tell you what to do and you must obey it .    fallom looked at pelorat with eyes that were open  but seemed empty .   bliss shook her head  sharply  but pelorat looked at her without any sign of understanding .   the robot s eyes rested briefly on fallom .  it said   the child is of no importance .  it does not have transducer lobes .     it does not yet have fully developed transducer lobes   said pelorat  panting   but it will have them in time .  it is a solarian child .     it is a child  but without fully developed transducer lobes it is not a solarian .  i am not compelled to follow its orders or to keep it from harm .     but it is the offspring of ruler bander .     is it .  how do you come to know that .    pelorat stuttered  as he sometimes did when overearnest .   wh what  other child would be on this estate .     how do you know there aren t a dozen .     have you seen any others .     it is i who will ask the questions .    at this moment  the robot s attention shifted as the second robot touched its arm .  the two robots who had been sent to the mansion were returning at a rapid run that  nevertheless  had a certain irregularity to it .   there was silence till they arrived and then one of them spoke in the solarian language at which all four of the robots seemed to lose their elasticity .  for a moment  they appeared to wither  almost to deflate .   pelorat said   they ve found bander   before trevize could wave him silent .   the robot turned slowly and said  in a voice that slurred the syllables   ruler bander is dead .  by the remark you have just made  you show us you were aware of the fact .  how did that come to be .     how can i know .   said trevize defiantly .    you knew it was dead .  you knew it was there to be found .  how could you know that  unless you had been there unless it was you that had ended the life .   the robot s enunciation was already improving .  it had endured and was absorbing the shock .   then trevize said   how could we have killed bander .  with its transducer lobes it could have destroyed us in a moment .     how do you know what  or what not  transducer lobes could do .     you mentioned the transducer lobes just now .     i did no more than mention them .  i did not describe their properties or abilities .     the knowledge came to us in a dream .     that is not a credible answer .    trevize said   to suppose that we have caused the death of bander is not credible  either .    pelorat added   and in any case  if ruler bander is dead  then ruler fallom now controls this estate .  here the ruler is  and it is it whom you must obey .     i have already explained   said the robot   that an offspring with undeveloped transducer lobes is not a solarian .  it cannot be a successor  therefore  another successor  of the appropriate age  will be flown in as soon as we report this sad news .     what of ruler fallom .     there is no ruler fallom .  there is only a child and we have an excess of children .  it will be destroyed .    bliss said forcefully   you dare not .  it is a child .     it is not i   said the robot   who will necessarily do the act and it is certainly not i who will make the decision .  that is for the consensus of the rulers .  in times of child excess  however  i know well what the decision will in .     no .  i say no .     it will be painless .   but another ship is coming .  it is important that we go into what was the bander mansion and set up a holovision council that will supply a successor and decide on what to do with you .   give me the child .    bliss snatched the semicomatose figure of fallom from pelorat .  holding it tightly and trying to balance its weight on her shoulder  she said   do not touch this child .    once again  the robot s arm shot out swiftly and it stepped forward  reaching for fallom .  bliss moved quickly to one side  beginning her motion well before the robot had begun its own .  the robot continued to move forward  however  as though bliss were still standing before it .  curving stiffly downward  with the forward tips of its feet as the pivot  it went down on its face .  the other three stood motionless  eyes unfocused .   bliss was sobbing  partly with rage .   i almost had the proper method of control  and it wouldn t give me the time .  i had no choice but to strike and now all four are inactivated .   let s get on the ship before the other ship lands .  i am too ill to face additional robots  now .      part five    melpomenia    chapter       away from solaria       .     the leaving was a blur .  trevize had gathered up his futile weapons  had opened the airlock  and they had tumbled in .  trevize didn t notice until they were off the surface that fallom had been brought in as well .   they probably would not have made it in time if the solarian use of airflight had not been so comparatively unsophisticated .  it took the approaching solarian vessel an unconscionable time to descend and land .  on the other hand  it took virtually no time for the computer of the far star to take the gravitic ship vertically upward .   and although the cut off of the gravitational interaction and  therefore  of inertia wiped out the otherwise unbearable effects of acceleration that would have accompanied so speedy a takeoff  it did not wipe out the effects of air resistance .  the outer hull temperature rose at a distinctly more rapid rate than navy regulations  or ship specifications  for that matter  would have considered suitable .   as they rose  they could see the second solarian ship land and several more approaching .  trevize wondered how many robots bliss could have handled  and decided they would have been overwhelmed if they had remained on the surface fifteen minutes longer .   once out in space  or space enough  with only tenuous wisps of the planetary exosphere around them   trevize made for the nightside of the planet .  it was a hop away  since they had left the surface as sunset was approaching .  in the dark  the far star would have a chance to cool more rapidly  and there the ship could continue to recede from the surface in a slow spiral .   pelorat came out of the room he shared with bliss .  he said   the child is sleeping normally now .  we ve showed it how to use the toilet and it had no trouble understanding .     that s not surprising .  it must have had similar facilities in the mansion .     i didn t see any there and i was looking   said pelorat feelingly .   we didn t get back on the ship a moment too soon for me .     or any of us .  but why did we bring that child on board .    pelorat shrugged apologetically .   bliss wouldn t let go .  it was like saving a life in return for the one she took .  she can t bear     i know   said trevize .   pelorat said   it s a very oddly shaped child .     being hermaphroditic  it would have to be   said trevize .    it has testicles  you know .     it could scarcely do without them .     and what i can only describe as a very small vagina .    trevize made a face .   disgusting .     not really  golan   said pelorat  protesting .   it s adapted to its needs .  it only delivers a fertilized egg cell  or a very tiny embryo  which is then developed under laboratory conditions  tended  i dare say  by robots .     and what happens if their robot system breaks down .  if that happens  they would no longer be able to produce viable young .     any world would be in serious trouble if its social structure broke down completely .     not that i would weep uncontrollably over the solarians .     well   said pelorat   i admit it doesn t seem a very attractive world to us  i mean .  but that s only the people and the social structure  which are not our type at all  dear chap .  but subtract the people and the robots  and you have a world which otherwise     might fall apart as aurora is beginning to do   said trevize .   how s bliss  janov .     worn out  i m afraid .  she s sleeping now .  she had a very bad time  golan .     i didn t exactly enjoy myself either .    trevize closed his eyes  and decided he could use some sleep himself and would indulge in that relief as soon as he was reasonably certain the solarians had no space capability and so far the computer had reported nothing of artifactitious nature in space .   he thought bitterly of the two spacer planets they had visited hostile wild dogs on one hostile hermaphroditic loners on the other and in neither place the tiniest hint as to the location of earth .  all they had to show for the double visit was fallom .   he opened his eyes .  pelorat was still sitting in place at the other side of the computer  watching him solemnly .   trevize said  with sudden conviction   we should have left that solarian child behind .    pelorat said   the poor thing .  they would have killed it .     even so   said trevize   it belonged there .  it s part of that society .  being put to death because of being superfluous is the sort of thing it s born to .     oh  my dear fellow  that s a hardhearted way to look at it .     it s a rational way .  we don t know how to care for it  and it may suffer more lingeringly with us and die anyway .  what does it eat .     whatever we do  i suppose  old man .  actually  the problem is what do we eat .  how much do we have in the way of supplies .     plenty .  plenty .  even allowing for our new passenger .    pelorat didn t look overwhelmed with happiness at this remark .  he said   it s become a pretty monotonous diet .  we should have taken some items on board on comporellon not that their cooking was excellent .     we couldn t .  we left  if you remember  rather hurriedly  as we left aurora  and as we left  in particular  solaria .   but what s a little monotony .  it spoils one s pleasure  but it keeps one alive .     would it be possible to pick up fresh supplies if we need to .     anytime  janov .  with a gravitic ship and hyperspatial engines  the galaxy is a small place .  in days  we can be anywhere .  it s just that half the worlds in the galaxy are alerted to watch for our ship and i would rather stay out of the way for a time .       suppose that s so .   bander didn t seem interested in the ship .     it probably wasn t even consciously aware of it .  i suspect that the solarians long ago gave up space flight .  their prime desire is to be left completely alone and they can scarcely enjoy the security of isolation if they are forever moving about in space and advertising their presence .     what are we going to do next  golan .    trevize said   we have a third world to visit .    pelorat shook his head .   judging from the first two  i don t expect much from that .     nor do i at the moment  but just as soon as i get a little sleep  i m going to get the computer to plot our course to that third world .       .   trevize slept considerably longer than he had expected to  but that scarcely mattered .  there was neither day nor night  in any natural  sense  on board ship  and the circadian rhythm never worked absolutely perfectly .  the hours were what they were made to be  and it wasn t uncommon for trevize and pelorat  and particularly bliss  to be somewhat out of sync as far as the natural rhythms of eating and sleeping were concerned .   trevize even speculated  in the course of his scrapedown  the importance of conserving water made it advisable to scrape off the suds rather than rinse them off   about sleeping another hour or two  when he turned and found himself staring at fallom  who was as undressed as he was .   he could not help jumping back  which  in the restricted area of the personal  was bound to bring part of his body against something hard .  he grunted   fallom was staring curiously at him and was pointing at trevize s penis .  what it said was incomprehensible but the whole bearing of the child seemed to bespeak a sense of disbelief .  for his own peace of mind  trevize had no choice but to put his hands over his penis .   then fallom said  in its high pitched voice   greetings .    trevize started slightly at the child s unexpected use of galactic  but the word had the sound of having been memorized .   fallom continued  a painstaking word at a time   bliss   say you wash  me .    yes .   said trevize .  he put his hands on fallom s shoulders .   you stay  here .    he pointed downward at the floor and fallom  of course  looked instantly at the place to which the finger pointed .  it showed no comprehension of the phrase at all .    don t move   said trevize  holding the child tightly by both arms  pressing them toward the body as though to symbolize immobility .  he hastily dried himself and put on his shorts  and over them his trousers .   he stepped out and roared   bliss .    it was difficult for anyone to be more than four meters from any one else on the ship and bliss came to the door of her room at once .  she said  smiling   are you calling me  trevize  or was that the soft breeze sighing through the waving grass .     let s not be funny  bliss .  what is that .   he jerked his thumb over his shoulder .   bliss looked past him and said   well  it looks like the young solarian we brought on board yesterday .     you brought on board .  why do you want me to wash it .     i should think you d want to .  it s a very bright creature .  it s picking up galactic words quickly .  it never forgets once i explain something .  of course  i m helping it do so .     naturally .     yes .  i keep it calm .  i kept it in a daze during most of the disturbing events on the planet .  i saw to it that it slept on board ship and i m trying to divert its mind just a little bit from its lost robot  jemby  that  apparently  it loved very much .     so that it ends up liking it here  i suppose .     i hope so .  it s adaptable because it s young  and i encourage that by as much as i dare influence its mind .  i m going to teach it to speak galactic .     then you wash it .  understood .    bliss shrugged .   i will  if you insist  but i would want it to feel friendly with each of us .  it would be useful to have each of us perform functions .  surely you can co operate in that .     not to this extent .  and when you finish washing it  get rid of it .  i want to talk to you .    bliss said  with a sudden edge of hostility   how do you mean  get rid of it .     i don t mean dump it through the airlock .  i mean  put it in your room .  sit it down in a corner .  i want to talk at you .     i ll be at your service   she said coldly .   he stared after her  nursing his wrath for the moment  then moved into the pilot room  and activated the viewscreen .   solaria was a dark circle with a curving crescent of light at the left .  trevize placed his hands on the desk to make contact with the computer and found his anger cooling at once .  one had to be calm to link mind and computer effectively and  eventually  conditioned reflex linked handhold and serenity .   there were no artifactitious objects about the ship in any direction  out as far as the planet itself .  the solarians  or their robots  most likely  could not  or would not  follow .   good enough .  he might as well get out of the night shadow  then .  if he continued to recede  it would  in any case  vanish as solaria s disc grew smaller than that of the more distant  but much larger  sun that it circled .   he set the computer to move the ship out of the planetary plane as well  since that would make it possible to accelerate with greater safety .  they would then more quickly reach a region where space curvature would be low enough to make the jump secure .   and  as often on such occasions  he fell to studying the stars .  they were almost hypnotic in their quiet changelessness .  all their turbulence and instability were wiped out by the distance that left them only dots of light .   one of those dots might well be the sun about which earth revolved the original sun  under whose radiation life began  and under whose beneficence humanity evolved .   surely  if the spacer worlds circled stars that were bright and prominent members of the stellar family  and that were nevertheless unlisted in the computer s galactic map  the same might be true of the sun .   or was it only the suns of the spacer worlds that were omitted because of some primeval treaty agreement that left them to themselves .  would earth s sun be included in the galactic map  but not marked off from the myriads of stars that were sun like  yet had no habitable planet in orbit about itself .   there were after all  some thirty billion sun like stars in the galaxy  and only about one in a thousand had habitable planets in orbits about them .  there might be a thousand such habitable planets within a few hundred parsecs of his present position .  should he sift through the sun like stars one by one  searching for them .   or was the original sun not even in this region of the galaxy .  how many other regions were convinced the sun was one of their neighbors  that they were primeval settlers  .   he needed information  and so far he had none .   he doubted strongly whether even the closest examination of the millennial ruins on aurora would give information concerning earth s location .  he doubted even more strongly that the solarians could be made to yield information .   then  too  if all information about earth had vanished out of the great library at trantor  if no information about earth remained in the great collective memory of gaia  there seemed little chance that any information that might have existed on the lost worlds of the spacers would have been overlooked .   and if he found earth s sun and  then  earth itself  by the sheerest good fortune would something force him to be unaware of the fact .  was earth s defense absolute .  was its determination to remain in hiding unbreakable .   what was he looking for anyway .   was it earth .   . or was it the flaw in seldon s plan that he thought  for no clear reason  he might find on earth .   seldon s plan had been working for five centuries now  and would bring the human species  so it was said  to safe harbor at last in the womb of a second galactic empire  greater than the first  a nobler and a freer one and yet he  trevize  had voted against it  and for galaxia .   galaxia would be one large organism  while the second galactic empire would  however great in size and variety  be a mere union of individual organisms of microscopic size in comparison with itself .  the second galactic empire would be another example of the kind of union of individuals that humanity had set up ever since it became humanity .  the second galactic empire might be the largest and best of the species  but it would still be but one more member of that species .   for galaxia  a member of an entirely different species of organization  to be better than the second galactic empire  there must be a flaw in the plan  something the great hari seldon had himself overlooked .   but if it were something seldon had overlooked  how could trevize correct the matter .  he was not a mathematician  knew nothing  absolutely nothing  about the details of the plan  would understand nothing  furthermore  even if it were explained to him .   all he knew were the assumptions that a great number of human beings be involved and that they not be aware of the conclusions reached .  the first assumption was self evidently true  considering the vast population of the galaxy  and the second had to be true since only the second foundationers knew the details of the plan  and they kept it to themselves securely enough .   that left an added unacknowledged assumption  a taken for granted assumption  one so taken for granted it was never mentioned nor thought of and yet one that might be false .  an assumption that  if it were false  would alter the grand conclusion of the plan and make galaxia preferable to empire .   but if the assumption was so obvious and so taken for granted that it was never even expressed  how could it be false .  and if no one ever mentioned it  or thought of it  how could trevize know it was there  or have any idea of its nature even if he guessed its existence .   was he truly trevize  the man with the flawless intuition as gaia insisted .  did he know the right thing to do even when he didn t know why he .  was doing it .   now he was visiting every spacer world he knew about .   was that the right thing to do .  did the spacer worlds hold the answer .  or at least the beginning of the answer .   what was there on aurora but ruins and wild dogs .   and  presumably  other feral creatures .  raging bulls .  overgrown rats .  stalking green eyed cats .   solaria was alive  but what was there on it but robots and energy transducing human beings .  what had either world to do with seldon s plan unless they contained the secret of the location of the earth .   and if they did  what had earth to do with seldon s plan .  was this all madness .  had he listened too long and too seriously to the fantasy of his own infallibility .   an overwhelming weight of shame came over him and seemed to press upon him to the point where he could barely breathe .  he looked at the stars  remote  uncaring and thought  i must be the great fool of the galaxy .      .   bliss s voice broke in on him .   well  trevize  why do you want to see  is anything wrong .   her voice had twisted into sudden concern .   trevize looked up and  for a moment  found it momentarily difficult to brush away his mood .  he stared at her  then said   no  no .  nothing s wrong .  i i was merely lost in thought .  every once in a while  after all  i find myself thinking .    .   he was uneasily aware that bliss could read his emotions .  he had only her word that she was voluntarily abstaining from any oversight of his mind .   she seemed to accept his statement  however .  she said   pelorat is with fallom  teaching it galactic phrases .  the child seems to eat what we do without undue objection .   but what do you want to see me about .     well  not here    said trevize .   the computer doesn t need me at the moment .  if you want to come into my room  the bed s made and you can sit on it while   sit on the chair .  or vice versa  if you prefer .     it doesn t matter .   they walked the short distance to trevize s room .  she eyed him narrowly .   you don t seem furious anymore .     checking my mind .     not at all .  checking your face .     i m not furious .  i may lose my temper momentarily  now and then  but that s not the same as furious .  if you don t mind  though  there are questions i must ask you .    bliss sat down on trevize s bed  holding herself erect  and with a solemn expression on her wide cheeked face and in her dark brown eyes .  her shoulder length black hair was neatly arranged and her slim hands were clasped loosely in her lap .  there was a faint trace of perfume about her .   trevize smiled .   you ve dolled yourself up .  i suspect you think i won t yell quite so hard at a young and pretty girl .     you can yell and scream all you wish if it will make you feel better .  i just don t want you yelling and screaming at fallom .     i don t intend to .  in fact  i don t intend to yell and scream at you .  haven t we decided to be friends .     gaia has never had anything but feelings of friendship toward you  trevize .     i m not talking about gaia .  i know you re part of gaia and that you are gaia .  still there s part of you that s an individual  at least after a fashion .  i m talking to the individual .  i m talking to someone named bliss without regard  or with as little regard as possible to gaia .  haven t we decided to be friends  bliss .     yes  trevize .     then how is it you delayed dealing with the robots on solaria after we had left the mansion and reached the ship .  i was humiliated and physically hurt  yet you did nothing .  even though every moment might bring additional robots to the scene and the number might overwhelm us  you did nothing .    bliss looked at him seriously  and spoke as though she were intent on explaining her actions rather than defending them .   i was not doing nothing  trevize .  i was studying the guardian robots  minds  and trying to learn how to handle them .     i know that s what you were doing .  at least you said you were at the time .  i just don t see the sense of it .  why handle the minds when you were perfectly capable of destroying them as you finally did .     do you think it so easy to destroy an intelligent being .    trevize s lips twisted into an expression of distaste .   come  bliss .  an intelligent being .  it was just a robot .     just a robot .   a little passion entered her voice .   that s the argument always .  just .  just .  why should the solarian  bander  have hesitated to kill us .  we were just human beings without transducers .  why should there be any hesitation about leaving fallom to its fate .  it was just a solarian  and an immature specimen at that .  if you start dismissing anyone or anything you want to do away with as just a this or just a that  you can destroy anything you wish .  there are always categories you can find for them .    trevize said   don t carry a perfectly legitimate remark to extremes just to make it seem ridiculous .  the robot was just a robot .  you can t deny that .  it was not human .  it was not intelligent in our sense .  it was a machine mimicking an appearance of intelligence .    bliss said   how easily you can talk when you know nothing about it .  i am gaia .  yes  i am bliss  too  but i am gaia .  i am a world that finds every atom of itself precious and meaningful  and every organization of atoms even more precious and meaningful .  i we gaia would not lightly break down an organization  though we would gladly build it into something still more complex  provided always that that would not harm the whole .    the highest form of organization we know produces intelligence  and to be willing to destroy intelligence requires the sorest need .  whether it is machine intelligence or biochemical intelligence scarcely matters .  in fact  the guardian robot represented a kind of intelligence i we gaia had never encountered .  to study it was wonderful .  to destroy it  unthinkable except in a moment of crowning emergency .    trevize said dryly   there were three greater intelligences at stake  your own  that of pelorat  the human being you love  and  if you don t mind my mentioning it  mine .     four .  you still keep forgetting to include fallom .   they were not yet at stake .  so i judged .  see here  suppose you were faced with a painting  a great artistic masterpiece  the existence of which meant death to you .  all you had to do was to bring a wide brush of paint slam bang  and at random  across the face of that painting and it would be destroyed forever  and you would be safe .  but suppose  instead  that if you studied the painting carefully  and added just a touch of paint here  a speck there  scraped off a minute portion in a third place  and so on  you would alter the painting enough to avoid death  and yet leave it a masterpiece .  naturally  the revision couldn t be done except with the most painstaking care .  it would take time  but surely  if that time existed  you would try to save the painting as well as your life .    trevize said   perhaps .  but in the end you destroyed the painting past redemption .  the wide paintbrush came down and wiped out all the wonderful little touches of color and subtleties of form and shape .  and you did that instantly when a little hermaphrodite was at risk  where our danger and your own had not moved you .     we outworlders were still not at immediate risk  while fallom  it seemed to me  suddenly was .  i had to choose between the guardian robots and fallom  and  with no time to lose  i had to choose fallom .     is that what it was  bliss .  a quick calculation weighing one mind against another  a quick judging of the greater complexity and the greater worth .     yes .    trevize said   suppose i tell you  it was just a child that was standing before you  a child threatened with death .  an instinctive maternalism gripped you then  and you saved it where earlier you were all calculation when only three adult lives were at stake .    bliss reddened slightly .   there might have been something like that in it  but it was not after the fashion of the mocking way in which you say it .  it had rational thought behind it  too .     i wonder .  if there had been rational thought behind it  you might have considered that the child was meeting the common fate inevitable in its own society .  who knows how many thousands of children had been cut down to maintain the low number these solarians think suitable to their world .     there s more to it than that  trevize .  the child would be killed because it was too young to be a successor  and that was because it had a parent who had died prematurely  and that was because i had killed that parent .     at a time when it was kill or be killed .     not important .  i killed the parent .  i could not stand by and allow the child to be killed for my deed .   besides  it offers for study a brain of a kind that has never been studied by gaia .     a child s brain .     it will not remain a child s brain .  it will further develop the two transducer lobes on either side of the brain .  those lobes give a solarian abilities that all of gaia cannot match .  simply to keep a few lights lit  just to activate a device to open a door  wore me out .  bander could have kept all the power going over an estate as great in complexity and greater in size than that city we saw on comporellon and do it even while sleeping .    trevize said   then you see the child as an important bit of fundamental brain research .     in a way  yes .     that s not the way i feel .  to me  it seems we have taken danger aboard .  great danger .     danger in what way .  it will adapt perfectly with my help .  it is highly intelligent  and already shows signs of feeling affection for us .  it will eat what we eat  go where we go  and i we gala will gain invaluable knowledge concerning its brain .     what if it produces young .  it doesn t need a mate .  it is its own mate .     it won t be of child bearing age for many years .  the spacers lived for centuries and the solarians had no desire to increase their numbers .  delayed reproduction is probably bred into the population .  fallom will have no children for a long time .     how do you know this .     i don t know it .  i m merely being logical .     and i tell you fallom will prove dangerous .     you don t know that .  and you re not being logical  either .     i feel it bliss  without reason .   at the moment .  and it is you  not i  who insists my intuition is infallible .    and bliss frowned and looked uneasy .      .   pelorat paused at the door to the pilot room and looked inside in a rather ill at ease manner .  it was as though he were trying to decide whether trevize was hard at work or not .   trevize had his hands on the table  as he always did when he made himself part of the computer  and his eyes were on the viewscreen .  pelorat judged  therefore  he was at work  and he waited patiently  trying not to move or  in any way  disturb the other .   eventually  trevize looked up at pelorat .  it was not a matter of total awareness .  trevize s eyes always seemed a bit glazed and unfocused when he was in computer communion  as though he were looking  thinking  living in some other way than a person usually did .   but he nodded slowly at pelorat  as though the sight  penetrating with difficulty  did  at last  sluggishly impress itself on the optic lobes .  then  after a while  he lifted his hands and smiled and was himself again .   pelorat said apologetically   i m afraid i m getting in your way  golan .    not seriously  janov .  i was just testing to see if we were ready for the jump .  we are  just about  but i think i ll give it a few more hours  just for luck .     does luck or random factors have anything to do with it .     an expression only   said trevize  smiling   but random factors do have something to do with it  in theory .   what s on your mind .     may i sit down .     surely  but let s go into my room .  how s bliss .     very well .   he cleared his throat .   she s sleeping again .  she must have her sleep  you understand .     i understand perfectly .  it s the hyperspatial separation .     exactly  old chap .     and fallom .   trevize reclined on the bed  leaving pelorat the chair .    those books out of my library that you had your computer print up for me .  the folk tales .  it s reading them .  of course  it understands very little galactic  but it seems to enjoy sounding out the words .  he s i keep wanting to use the masculine pronoun for it .  why do you suppose that is  old fellow .    trevize shrugged .   perhaps because you re masculine yourself .     perhaps .  it s fearfully intelligent  you know .     i m sure .    pelorat hesitated .   i gather you re not very fond of fallom .     nothing against it personally  janov .  i ve never had children and i ve never been particularly fond of them generally .  you ve had children  i seem to remember .     one son .   it was a pleasure  i recall  having my son when he was a little boy .  maybe that s why i want to use the masculine pronoun for fallom .  it takes me back a quarter of a century or so .     i ve no objection to your liking it  janov .     you d like him  too  if you gave yourself a chance .     i m sure i would  janov  and maybe someday i will give myself a chance to do so .    pelorat hesitated again .   i also know that you must get tired of arguing with bliss .     actually  i don t think we ll be arguing much  janov .  she and i are actually getting along quite well .  we even had a reasonable discussion just the other day no shouting  no recrimination about her delay in inactivating the guardian robots .  she keeps saving our lives  after all  so i can t very well offer her less than friendship  can i .     yes  i see that  but i don t mean arguing  in the sense of quarreling .  i mean this constant wrangle about galaxia as opposed to individuality .     oh  that .  i suppose that will continue politely .     would you mind  golan  if i took up the argument on her behalf .     perfectly all right .  do you accept the idea of galaxia on your own  or is it that you simply feel happier when you agree with bliss .     honestly  on my own .  i think that galaxia is what should be forthcoming .  you yourself chose that course of action and i am constantly becoming more convinced that that is correct .     because i chose it .  that s no argument .  whatever gaia says  i may be wrong  you know .  so don t let bliss persuade you into galaxia on that basis .     i don t think you are wrong .  solaria showed me that  not bliss .     how .     well  to begin with  we are isolates  you and l    her term  janov .  i prefer to think of us as individuals .     a matter of semantics  old chap .  call it what you will  we are enclosed in our private skins surrounding our private thoughts  and we think first and foremost of ourselves .  self defense is our first law of nature  even if that means harming everyone else in existence .     people have been known to give their lives for others .     a rare phenomenon .  many more people have been known to sacrifice the dearest needs of others to some foolish whim of their own .     and what has that to do with solaria .     why  on solaria  we see what isolates or individuals  if you prefer can become .  the solarians can hardly bear to divide a whole world among themselves .  they consider living a life of complete isolation to be perfect liberty .   they have no yearning for even their own offspring  but kill them if there are too many .  they surround themselves with robot slaves to which they supply the power  so that if they die  their whole huge estate symbolically dies as well .  is this admirable  golan .  can you compare it in decency  kindness  and mutual concern with gaia .   bliss has not discussed this with me at all .  it is my own feeling .    trevize said   and it is like you to have that feeling  janov .  i share it .  i think solarian society is horrible  but it wasn t always like that .  they are descended from earthmen  and  more immediately  from spacers who lived a much more normal life .  the solarians chose a path  for one reason or another  which led to an extreme  but you can t judge by extremes .  in all the galaxy  with its millions of inhabited worlds  is there one you know that now  or in the past  has had a society like that of solaria  or even remotely like that of solaria .  and would even solaria have such a society if it were not riddled with robots .  is it conceivable that a society of individuals could evolve to such a pitch of solarian horror without robots .    pelorat s face twitched a little .   you punch holes in everything  golan or at least i mean you don t ever seem to be at a loss in defending the type of galaxy you voted against .     i won t knock down everything .  there is a rationale for galaxia and when i find it  i ll know it  and i ll give in .  or perhaps  more accurately  if i find it .    do you think you might not .    trevize shrugged .   how can i say .   do you know why i m waiting a few hours to make the jump  and why i m in danger of talking myself into waiting a few days .     you said it would be safer if we waited .     yes  that s what i said  but we d be safe enough now .  what i really fear is that those spacer worlds for which we have the co ordinates will fail us altogether .  we have only three  and we ve already used up two  narrowly escaping death each time .  in doing so  we have still not gained any hint as to earth s location  or even  in actual fact  earth s existence .  now i face the third and last chance  and what if it  too  fails us .    pelorat sighed .   you know there are old folk tales one  in  fact  exists among those i gave fallom to practice upon in which someone is allowed three wishes  but only three .  three seems to be a significant number in these things  perhaps because it is the first odd number so that it is the smallest decisive number .  you know  two out of three wins .   the point is that in these stories  the wishes are of no use .  no one ever wishes correctly  which  i have always supposed  is ancient wisdom to the effect that the satisfaction of your wants must be earned  and not    he fell suddenly silent and abashed .   i m sorry  old man  but i m wasting your time .  i do tend to rattle on when i get started on my hobby .     i find you always interesting  janov .  i am willing to see the analogy .  we have been given three wishes  and we have had two and they have done us no good .  now only one is left .  somehow  i am sure of failure again and so i wish to postpone it .  that is why i am putting off the jump as long as possible .     what will you do if you do fail again .  go back to gaia .  to terminus .     oh no   said trevize in a whisper  shaking his head .   the search must continue if i only knew how .      chapter       dead planet       .     trevize felt depressed .  what few victories he had had since the search began had never been definitive  they had merely been the temporary staving off of defeat  now he had delayed the jump to the third of the spacer worlds till he had spread his unease to the others .  when he finally decided that he simply must tell the computer to move the ship through hyperspace  pelorat was standing solemnly in the doorway to the pilot room  and bliss was just behind him and to one side .  even fallom was standing there  gazing at trevize owlishly  while one hand gripped bliss s hand tightly .   trevize had looked up from the computer and had said  rather churlishly   quite the family group .   but that was only his own discomfort speaking .   he instructed the computer to jump in such a way as to reenter space at a further distance from the star in question than was absolutely necessary .  he told himself that that was because he was learning caution as a result of events on the first two spacer worlds  but he didn t believe that .  well underneath  he knew  he was hoping that he would arrive .  in space at a great enough distance from the star to be uncertain as to whether it did or did not have a habitable planet .  that would give him a few more days of in space travel before he could find out  and  perhaps  have to stare bitter defeat in the face .   so now  with the  family group  watching  he drew a deep breath  held it  then expelled it in a between the lips whistle as he gave the computer its final instruction .   the star pattern shifted in a silent discontinuity and the viewscreen became barer  for he had been taken into a region in which the stars were somewhat sparser .  and there  nearly in the center  was a brightly gleaming star .   trevize grinned broadly  for this was a victory of sorts .  after all  the third  set of co ordinates might have been wrong and there might have been no appropriate g type star in sight .  he glanced toward the other three  and said   that s it .  star number three .     are you sure .   asked bliss softly .    watch .   said trevize .   i will switch to the equi centered view in the computer s galactic map  and if that bright star disappears  it s not recorded on the map  and it s the one we want .    the computer responded to his command  and the star blinked out without any prior dimming .  it was as though it had never been  but the rest of the starfield remained as it was  in sublime indifference .    we ve got it   said trevize .   and yet he sent the far star forward at little more than half the speed he might easily have maintained .  there was still the question of the presence or absence of a habitable planet  and he was in no hurry to find out .  even after three days of approach  there was still nothing to be said about that  either way .   or  perhaps  not quite nothing .  circling the star was a large gas giant .  it was very far from its star and it gleamed a very pale yellow on its daylight side  which they could see  from their position  as a thick crescent .   trevize did not like its looks  but he tried not to show it and spoke as matter of factly as a guidebook .   there s a big gas giant out there   he said .   it s rather spectacular .  it has a thin pair of rings and two sizable satellites that can be made out at the moment .    bliss said   most systems include gas giants  don t they .     yes  but this is a rather large one .  judging from the distance of its satellites  and their periods of revolution  that gas giant is almost two thousand times as massive as a habitable planet would be .     what s the difference .   said bliss .   gas giants are gas giants and it doesn t matter what size they are  does it .  they re always present at great distances from the star they circle  and none of them are habitable  thanks to their size and distance .  we just have to look closer to the star for a habitable planet .    trevize hesitated  then decided to place the facts on the table .   the thing is   he said   that gas giants tend to sweep a volume of planetary space clean .  what material they don t absorb into their own structures will coalesce into fairly large bodies that come to make up their satellite system .  they prevent other coalescences at even a considerable distance from themselves  so that the larger the gas giant  the more likely it is to be the only sizable planet of a particular star .  there ll just be the gas giant and asteroids .     you mean there is no habitable planet here .     the larger the gas giant  the smaller the chance of a habitable planet and that gas giant is so massive it is virtually a dwarf star .    pelorat said   may we see it .    all three now stared at the screen  fallom was in bliss s room with the j books  .   the view was magnified till the crescent filled the screen .  crossing that crescent a distance above center was a thin dark line  the shadow of the ring system which could itself be seen a small distance beyond the planetary surface as a gleaming curve that stretched into the dark side a short distance before it entered the shadow itself .   trevize said   the planet s axis of rotation is inclined about thirty five degrees to its plane of revolution  and its ring is in the planetary equatorial plane  of course  so that the star s light comes in from below  at this point in its orbit  and casts the ring s shadow well above the equator .    pelorat watched raptly .   those are thin rings .     rather above average size  actually   said trevize .    according to legend  the rings that circle a gas giant in earth s planetary system are much wider  brighter  and more elaborate than this one .  the rings actually dwarf the gas giant by comparison .     i m not surprised   said trevize .   when a story is handed on from person to person for thousands of years  do you suppose it shrinks in the telling .    bliss said   it s beautiful .  if you watch the crescent  it seems to writhe and wriggle before your eyes .     atmospheric storms   said trevize .   you can generally see that more clearly if you choose an appropriate wavelength of light .  here  let me try .   he placed his hands on the desk and ordered the computer to work its way through the spectrum and stop at the appropriate wavelength .   the mildly lit crescent went into a wilderness of color that shifted so rapidly it almost dazed the eyes that tried to follow .  finally  it settled into a red orange  and  within the crescent  clear spirals   drifted  coiling and uncoiling as they moved .    unbelievable   muttered pelorat .    delightful   said bliss .   quite believable  thought trevize bitterly  and anything but delightful .  neither pelorat nor bliss  lost in the beauty  bothered to think that the planet they admired lowered the chances of solving the mystery trevize was trying to unravel .  but  then  why should they .  both were satisfied that trevize s decision had been correct  and they accompanied him in his  search for certainty without an emotional bond to it .  it was useless to blame them for that .   he said   the dark side seems dark  but if our eyes were sensitive to the range just a little beyond the usual long wave limit  we would see it as a dull  deep  angry red .  the planet is pouring infrared radiation out into space in great quantities because it is massive enough to be almost red hot .  it s more than a gas giant  it s   sub star .    he waited a little longer and then said   and now let s put that object out of our mind and look for the habitable planet that may exist .     perhaps it does   said pelorat  smiling .   don t give up  old fellow .     i haven t given up   said trevize  without true conviction .   the formation of planets is too complicated a matter for rules to be hard and fast .  we speak only of probabilities .  with that monster out in space  the probabilities decrease  but not to zero .    bliss said   why don t you think of it this way .  since the first two sets of co ordinates each gave you a habitable planet of the spacers  then this third set  which has already given you an appropriate star  should give you a habitable planet as well .  why speak of probabilities .     i certainly hope you re right   said trevize  who did not feel at all consoled .   now we will shoot out of the planetary plane and in toward the star .    the computer took care of that almost as soon as he had spoken his intention .  he sat back in his pilot s chair and decided  once again  that the one evil of piloting a gravitic ship with a computer so advanced was that one could never never pilot any other type of ship again .   could he ever again bear to do the calculations himself .  could he bear to have to take acceleration into account  and limit it to a reasonable level .   in all likelihood  he would forget and pour on the energy till he and everyone on board were smashed against one interior wall or another .   well  then  he would continue to pilot this one ship or another exactly like it  if he could even bear to make so much of a change always .   and because he wanted to keep his mind off the question of the habitable planet  yes or no  he mused on the fact that he had directed the ship to move above the plane  rather than below .  barring any definite reason to go below a plane  pilots almost always chose to go above .  why .   for that matter  why be so intent on considering one direction above and the other below .  in the symmetry of space that was pure convention .   just the same  he was always aware of the direction in which any planet under observation rotated about its axis and revolved about its star .  when both were counterclockwise  then the direction of one s raised arm was north  and the direction of one s feet was south .  and throughout the galaxy  north was pictured as above and south as below .   it was pure convention  dating back into the primeval mists  and it was followed slavishly .  if one looked at a familiar map with south above  one didn t recognize it .  it had to be turned about to make sense .  and all things being equal  one turned north and  above .    trevize thought of a battle fought by bel riose  the imperial general of three centuries before  who had veered his squadron below the planetary plane at a crucial moment  and caught a squadron of vessels  waiting and unprepared .  there were complaints that it had been an unfair maneuver by the losers  of course .   a convention  so powerful and so primordially old  must have started on earth and that brought trevize s mind  with a jerk  back to the question of the habitable planet .   pelorat and bliss continued to watch the gas giant as it slowly turned on the viewscreen in a slow  slow back somersault .  the sunlit portion spread and  as trevize kept its spectrum fixed in the orange red wavelengths  the storm writhing of its surface became ever madder and more hypnotic .   then fallom came wandering in and bliss decided it must take a nap and that so must she .   trevize said to pelorat  who remained   i have to let go of the gas giant  janov .  i want to have the computer concentrate on the search for a gravitational blip of the right size .     of course  old fellow   said pelorat .   but it was more complicated than that .  it was not just a blip of the right size that the computer had to search for  it was one of the right size and at the right distance .  it would still be several days before he could be sure .      .   trevize walked into his room  grave  solemn indeed somber and started perceptibly .   bliss was waiting for him and immediately next to her was fallow  with its loincloth and robe bearing the unmistakable fresh odor of steaming and vacupressing .  the youngster looked better in that than in one of bliss s foreshortened nightgowns .   bliss said   i didn t want to disturb you at the computer  but now listen .   go on  fallow .    fallow said  in its high pitched musical voice   i greet you  protector trevize .  it is with great pleasure that i am ap ad accompanying you on this ship through space .  i am happy  too  for the kindness of my friends  bliss and pel .    fallow finished and smiled prettily  and once again trevize thought to himself  do i think of it as a boy or as a girl or as both or as neither .   he nodded his head .   very well memorized .  almost perfectly pronounced .     not at all memorized   said bliss warmly .   fallow composed this itself and asked if it would be possible to recite it to you .  i didn t even know what fallow would say till i heard it said .    trevize forced a smile   in that case  very good indeed .   he noticed bliss avoided pronouns when she could .   bliss turned to fallow and said   i told you trevize would like it .   now go to pel and you can have some more reading if you wish .    fallow ran off  and bliss said   it s really astonishing how quickly fallow is picking up galactic .  the solarians must have a special aptitude for languages .  think how bander spoke galactic merely from hearing it on hyperspatial communications .  those brains may be remarkable in ways other than energy transduction .    trevize grunted .   bliss said   don t tell me you still don t like fallom .     i neither like nor dislike .  the creature simply makes me uneasy .  for one thing  it s a grisly feeling to be dealing with a hermaphrodite .    bliss said   come  trevize  that s ridiculous .  fallom is a perfectly acceptable living creature .  to a society of hermaphrodites  think how disgusting you and i must seem males and females generally .  each is half of a whole and  in order to reproduce  there must be a temporary and clumsy union .     do you object to that  bliss .     don t pretend to misunderstand .  i am trying to view us from the hermaphroditic standpoint .  to them  it must seem repellent in the extreme  to us  it seems natural .  so fallom seems repellent to you  but that s just a shortsighted parochial reaction .     frankly   said trevize   it s annoying not to know the pronoun to use in connection with the creature .  it impedes thought and conversation to hesitate forever at the pronoun .     but that s the fault of our language   said bliss   and not of fallom .  no human language has been devised with hermaphroditism in mind .  and i m glad you brought it up  because i ve been thinking about it myself .   saying  it   as bander itself insisted on doing  is no solution .  that is a pronoun intended for objects to which sex is irrelevant  and there is no pronoun at all for objects that are sexually active in both senses .  why not just pick one of the pronouns arbitrarily  then .  i think of fallom as a girl .  she has the high voice of one  for one thing  and she has the capacity of producing young  which is the vital definition of femininity .  pelorat has agreed  why don t you do so  too .  let it be  she  and  her .     trevize shrugged .   very well .  it will sound peculiar to point out that she has testicles  but very well .    bliss sighed .   you do have this annoying habit of trying to turn everything into a joke  but i know you are under tension and i ll make allowance for that .  just use the feminine pronoun for fallom  please .     i will .   trevize hesitated  then  unable to resist  said   fallom seems more your surrogate child every time i see you together .  is it that you want a child and don t think janov can give you one .    bliss s eyes opened wide .   he s not there for children .  do you think i use him as a handy device to help me have a child .  it is not time for me to have a child  in any case .  and when it is time  it will have to be a gaian child  something for which pel doesn t qualify .     you mean janov will have to be discarded .     not at all .  a temporary diversion  only .  it might even be brought about by artificial insemination .     i presume you can only have a child when gaia s decision is that one is  necessary  when there is a gap produced by the death of an already existing   gaian human fragment .     that is an unfeeling way of putting it  but it is true enough .  gaia must be well proportioned in all its parts and relationships .     as in the case of the solarians .    bliss s lips pressed together and her face grew a little white .   not at all .     the solarians produce more than they need and destroy the excess .  we produce just what we need and there is never a necessity of destroying as you replace the dying outer layers of your skin by just enough new growth for renewal and by not one cell more .     i see what you mean   said trevize .   i hope  by the way  that you are considering janov s feelings .     in connection with a possible child for me .  that has never come up for discussion  nor will it .     no  i don t mean that .   it strikes me you are becoming more and more interested in fallom .  janov may feel neglected .     he s not neglected  and he is as interested in fallom as i am .  she is another point of mutual involvement that draws us even closer together .  can it be that you are the one who feels neglected .     i .   he was genuinely surprised .    yes  you .  i don t understand isolates any more than you understand gaia  but i have a feeling that you enjoy being the central point of attention on this ship  and you may feel cut out by fallom .     that s foolish .     no more foolish than your suggestion that i am  neglecting pel .     then let s declare a truce and stop .  i ll try to view fallom as a girl  and i shall not worry excessively about you being inconsiderate of janov s feelings .    bliss smiled .   thank you .  all is well  then .    trevize turned away  and bliss then said   wait .    trevize turned back and said  just a bit wearily   yes .     it s quite clear to me  trevize  that you re sad and depressed .  i am not going to probe your mind  but you might be willing to tell me what s wrong .  yesterday  you said there was an appropriate planet in this system and you seemed quite pleased .   it s still there  i hope .  the finding hasn t turned out to be mistaken  has it .     there s an appropriate planet in the system  and it s still there   said trevize .    is it the right size .    trevize nodded .   since it s appropriate  it s of the right size .  and it s at the right distance from the star as well .     well  then  what s wrong .     we re close enough now to analyze the atmosphere .  it turns out that it has none to speak of .     no atmosphere .     none to speak of .  it s a nonhabitable planet  and there is no other circling the sun that has even the remotest capacity for habitability .  we have come up with zero on this third attempt .       .   pelorat  looking grave  was clearly unwilling to intrude on trevize s unhappy silence .  he watched from the door of the pilot room  apparently hoping that trevize would initiate a conversation .   trevize did not .  if ever a silence seemed stubborn  his did .   and finally  pelorat could stand it no longer  and said  in a rather timid way   what are we doing .    trevize looked up  stared at pelorat for a moment  turned away  and then said   we re zeroing in on the planet .     but since there s no atmosphere     the computer says there s no atmosphere .  till now  it s always told me what i ve wanted to hear and i ve accepted it .  now it has told me something i don t want to hear  and i m going to check it .  if the computer is ever going to be wrong  this is the time i want it to be wrong .     do you think it s wrong .     no  i don t .     can you think of any reason that might make it wrong .     no  i can t .     then why are you bothering  golan .    and trevize finally wheeled in his seat to face pelorat  his face twisted in near despair  and said   don t you see  janov  that i can t think of anything else to do .  we drew blanks on the first two worlds as far as earth s location is concerned  and now this world is a blank .  what do i do now .  wander from world to world  and peer about and say   pardon me .  where s earth .   earth has covered its tracks too well .  nowhere has it left any hint .  i m beginning to think that it will see to it that we re incapable of picking up a hint even if one exists .    pelorat nodded  and said   i ve been thinking along those lines myself .  do you mind if we discuss it .  i know you re unhappy  old chap  and don t want to talk  so if you want me to leave you alone  i will .     go ahead  discuss it   said trevize  with something that was remarkably like a groan .   what have i got better to do than listen .    pelorat said   that doesn t sound as though you really want me to talk  but perhaps it will do us good .  please stop me at any time if you decide you can stand it no longer .   it seems to me  golan  that earth need not take only passive and negative measures to hide itself .  it need not merely wipe out references to itself .  might it not plant false evidence and work actively for obscurity in that fashion .     how do you mean .     well  we ve heard of earth s radioactivity in several places  and that sort of thing would be designed to make anyone break off any attempt to locate it .  if it were truly radioactive  it would be totally unapproachable .  in all likelihood  we would not even be able to set foot on it .  even robot explorers  if we had any  might not survive the radiation .  so why look .  and if it is not radioactive  it remains inviolate  except for accidental approach  and even then it might have other means of masking itself .    trevize managed a smile .   oddly enough  janov  that thought has occurred to me .  it has even occurred to me that that improbable giant satellite has been invented and planted in the world s legends .  as for the gas giant with the monstrous ring system  that is equally improbable and may be equally planted .  it is all designed  perhaps  to have us look for something that doesn t exist  so that we go right through the correct planetary system  staring at earth and dismissing it because  in actual fact  it lacks a large satellite or a triple ringed cousin or a radioactive crust .  we don t recognize it  therefore  and don t dream we are looking at it .   i imagine worse  too .    pelorat looked downcast .   how can there be worse .     easily when your mind gets sick in the middle of the night and begins searching the vast realm of fantasy for anything that can deepen despair .  what if earth s ability to hide is ultimate .  what if our minds can be clouded .  what if we can move right past earth  with its giant satellite and with its distant ringed gas giant  and never see any of it .  what if we have already done so .     but if you believe that  why are we  .     i don t say i believe that .  i m talking about mad fancies .  we ll keep on looking .    pelorat hesitated  then said   for how long  trevize .  at some point  surely  we ll have to give up .     never   said trevize fiercely .   if i have to spend the rest of my life going from planet to planet and peering about and saying   please  sir  where s earth .   then that s what i ll do .  at any time  i can take you and bliss and even fallom  if you wish  back to gaia and then take of on my own .     oh no .  you know i won t leave you  golan  and neither will bliss .  we ll go planet hopping with you  if we must .  but why .      . because i must find earth  and because i will .  i don t know how  but i will .   now  look  i m trying to reach a position where i can study the sunlit aide of the planet without its suit being too close  so just let me be for a while .    pelorat fell silent  but did not leave .  he continued to watch while trevize studied the planetary image  more than half in daylight  on the screen .  to pelorat  it seemed featureless  but he knew that trevize  bound to the computer  saw it under enhanced circumstances .   trevize whispered   there s a haze .     then there must be an atmosphere   blurted out pelorat .    not necessarily much of one .  not enough to support life  but enough to support a thin wind that will raise dust .  it s a well known characteristic of planets with thin atmospheres .  there may even be small polar ice caps .  a little water ice condensed at the poles  you know .  this world is too warm for solid carbon dioxide .   i ll have to switch to radar mapping .  and if i do that i can work more easily on the nightside .     really .     yes .  i should have tried it first  but with a virtually airless and  therefore  cloudless planet  the attempt .  with visible light seems so natural .    trevize was silent for a long time  while the viewscreen grew fuzzy with radar reflections that produced almost the abstraction of a planet  something that an artist of the cleonian period might have produced .  then he said   well   emphatically  holding the sound for a while  and was silent again .   pelorat said  at last   what s the  well  about .    trevize looked at him briefly .   no craters that i can see .     no craters .  is that good .     totally unexpected   said trevize .  his face broke into a grin   and very good .  in fact  possibly magnificent .       .   fallom remained with her nose pressed against the ship s porthole  where a small segment of the universe was visible in the precise form in which the eye saw it  without computer enlargement or enhancement .   bliss  who had been trying to explain it all  sighed and said in a low voice to pelorat   i don t know how much she understands  pel dear .  to her  her father s mansion and a small section of the estate it stood upon was all the universe .  i don t think she was ever out at night  or ever saw the stars .     do you really think so .     i really do .  i didn t dare show her any part of it until she had enough vocabulary to understand me just a little and how fortunate it was that you could speak with her in her own language .     the trouble is i m not very good at it   said pelorat apologetically .   and the universe is rather hard to grasp if you come at it suddenly .  she said to me that if those little lights are giant worlds  each one just like solaria they re much larger than solaria  of course that they couldn t hang in nothing .  they ought to fall  she says .     and she s right  judging by what she knows .  she asks sensible questions  and little by little  she ll understand .  at least she s curious and she s not frightened .     the thing is  bliss  i m curious  too .  look how golan changed as soon as he found out there were no craters on the world we re heading for .  i haven t the slightest idea what difference that makes .  do you .     not a bit .  still he knows much more planetology than we do .  we can only assume he knows what he s doing .     i wish i knew .     well  ask him .    pelorat grimaced .   i m always afraid i ll annoy him .  i m sure he thinks i ought to know these things without being told .    bliss said   that s silly  pel .  he has no hesitation in asking you about any aspect of the galaxy s legends and myths which he thinks might be useful .  you re always willing to answer and explain  so why shouldn t he be .  you go ask him .  if it annoys him  then he ll have a chance to practice sociability  and that will be good for him .     will you come with me .     no  of course not .  i want to stay with fallom and continue to try to get the concept of the universe into her head .  you can always explain it to me afterward once he explains it to you .       .   pelorat entered the pilot room diffidently .  he was delighted to note that trevize was whistling to himself and was clearly in a good mood .    golan   he said  as brightly as he could .   trevize looked up .   janov .  you re always tiptoeing in as though you think it s against the law to disturb me .  close the door and sit down .  sit down .  look at that thing .    he pointed to the planet on the viewscreen  and said   i haven t found more than two or three craters  each quite small .     does that make a difference  golan .  really .     a difference .  certainly .  how can you ask .    pelorat gestured helplessly .   it s all a mystery to me .  i was a history major at college .  i took sociology and psychology in addition to history  also languages and literature  mostly ancient  and specialized in mythology in graduate school .  i never came near planetology  or any of the physical sciences .     that s no crime  janov .  i d rather you know what you know .  your facility in ancient languages and in mythology has been of enormous use to us .  you know that .   and when it comes to a matter of planetology  i ll take care of that .    he went on   you see  janov  planets form through the smashing together of smaller objects .  the last few objects to collide leave crater marks .  potentially  that is .  if the planet is large enough to be a gas giant  it is essentially liquid under a gaseous atmosphere and the final collisions are just splashes and leave no marks .    smaller planets which are solid  whether icy or rocky  do show crater marks  and these remain indefinitely unless an agency for removal exists .  there are three types of removals .    first  a world may have an icy surface overlying a liquid ocean .  in that case  any colliding object breaks through the ice and splashes water .  behind it the ice refreezes and heals the puncture  so to speak .  such a planet  or satellite  would have to be cold  and would not be what we would consider a habitable world .    second  if a planet is intensely active  volcanically  then a perpetual lava flow or ash fallout is forever filling in and obscuring any craters that form .  however  such a planet or satellite is not likely to be habitable either .   q  that brings us to habitable worlds as a third case .  such worlds may have polar ice caps  but most of the ocean must be freely liquid .  they may have active volcanoes  but these must be sparsely distributed .  such worlds can neither heal craters  nor fill them in .  there are  however  erosion effects .  wind and flowing water will erode craters  and if there is life  the actions of living things are strongly erosive as well .  see .    pelorat considered that  then said   but  golan  i don t understand you at all .  this planet we re approaching     we ll be landing tomorrow   said trevize cheerfully .    this planet we re approaching doesn t have an ocean .     only some thin polar ice caps .     or much of an atmosphere .     only a hundredth the density of the atmosphere on terminus .     or life .     nothing i can detect .     then what could have eroded away the craters .     an ocean  an atmosphere  and life   said trevize .   look  if this planet had been airless and waterless from the start  any craters that had been formed would still exist and the whole surface would be cratered .  the absence of craters proves it can t have been airless and waterless from the start  and may even have had a sizable atmosphere and ocean in the near past .  besides  there are huge basins  visible on this world  that must have held seas  and oceans once  to say nothing of the marks of rivers that are now dry .  so you see there was erosion and that erosion has ceased so short a time ago  that new cratering has not yet had time to accumulate .    pelorat looked doubtful .   i may not be a planetologist  but it seems to me that if a planet is large enough to hang on to a dense atmosphere for perhaps billions of years  it isn t going to suddenly lose it  is it .     i shouldn t think so   said trevize .   but this world undoubtedly held life before its atmosphere vanished  probably human life .  my guess is that it was a terraformed world as almost all the human inhabited worlds of the galaxy are .  the trouble is that we don t really know what its condition was before human life arrived  or what was done to it in order to make it comfortable for human beings  or under what conditions  actually  life vanished .  there may have been a catastrophe that sucked off the atmosphere and that brought about the end of human life .  or there may have been some strange imbalance on this planet that human beings controlled as long as they were here and that went into a vicious cycle of atmospheric reduction once they were gone .  maybe we ll find the answer when we land  or maybe we won t .  it doesn t matter .     but surely neither does it matter if there was life here once  if there isn t now .  what s the difference if a planet has always been uninhabitable  or is only uninhabitable now .     if it is only uninhabitable now  there will be ruins of the one time inhabitants .     there were ruins on aurora     exactly  but on aurora there had been twenty thousand years of rain and snow  freezing and thawing  wind and temperature change .  and there was also life don t forget life  there may not have been human beings there  but there was plenty of life .  ruins can be eroded just as craters can .  faster .  and in twenty thousand years  not enough was left to do us any good .   here on this planet  however  there has been a passage of time  perhaps twenty thousand years  perhaps less  without wind  or storm  or life .  there has been temperature change  i admit  but that s all .  the ruins will be in good shape .     unless   murmured pelorat doubtfully   there are no ruins .  is it possible that there was never any life on the planet  or never  . any human life at any rate  and that the loss of the atmosphere was due to some event that human beings had nothing to do with .     no  no   said trevize .   you can t turn pessimist on me  because it won t work .  even from here  i ve spotted the remains of what i m sure was a city .   so we land tomorrow .       .   bliss said  in a worried tone   fallow is convinced we re going to take her back to jemby  her  robot .     umm   said trevize  studying the surface of the world as it slid back under the drifting ship .  then he looked up as though he had heard the remark only after a delay .   well  it was the only parent she knew  wasn t it .     yes  of course  but she thinks we ve come back to solaria .     does it look like solaria .     how would she know .     tell her it s not solaria .  look  i ll give you one or two reference bookfilms with graphic illustrations .  show her close ups of a number of different inhabited worlds and explain that there are millions of them .  you ll have time for it .  i don t know how long janov and i will have to wander around  once we pick a likely target and land .     you and janov .     yes .  fallom can t come with us  even if i wanted her to  which i would only want if i were a madman .  this world requires space suits  bliss .  there s no breathable air .  and we don t have a space suit that would fit fallom .  so she and you stay on the ship .      why it   trevize s lips stretched into a humorless smile .   i admit   he said   i would feel safer if you were along  but we can t leave fallom on this ship alone .  she can do damage even if she doesn t mean to .  i must have janov with me because he might be able to make out whatever archaic writing they have here .  that means you will have to stay with fallom .  i should think you would want to .    bliss looked uncertain .   trevize said   look .  you wanted fallom along  when i didn t .  i m convinced she ll be nothing but trouble .  so her presence introduces constraints  and you ll have to adjust yourself to that .  she s here  so you ll have to be here  too .  that s the way it is .    bliss sighed .   i suppose so .     good .  where s janov .     he s with fallom .     very well .  go and take over .  i want to talk to him .    trevize was still studying the planetary surface when pelorat walked in  clearing his throat to announce his presence .  he said   is anything wrong  golan .     not exactly wrong  janov .  i m just uncertain .  this is a peculiar world and i don t know what happened to it .  the seas must have been extensive  judging from the basins left behind  but they were shallow .  as nearly as i can tell from the traces left behind  this was a world of desalinization and canals or perhaps the seas weren t very salty .  if they weren t very salty  that would account for the absence of extensive salt flats in the basins .  or else  when the ocean was lost  the salt content was lost with it which certainly makes it look like a human deed .    pelorat said hesitantly   excuse my ignorance about such things  golan  but does any of this matter as far as what we are looking for is concerned .     i suppose not  but i can t help being curious .  if i knew just how this planet was terraformed into human habitability and what it was like before terraforming  then perhaps i would understand what has happened to it after it was abandoned or just before  perhaps .  and if we did know what happened to it  we might be forewarned against unpleasant surprises .     what kind of surprises .  it s a dead world  isn t it .     dead enough .  very little water  thin  unbreathable atmosphere  and bliss detects no signs of mental activity .     that should settle it  i should think .     absence of mental activity doesn t necessarily imply lack of life .     it must surely imply lack of dangerous life .     i don t know .   but that s not what i want to consult you about .  there are two cities that might do for our first inspection .  they seem to be in excellent shape  all the cities do .  whatever destroyed the air and oceans did not seem to touch the cities .  anyway  those two cities are particularly large .  the larger  however  seems to be short on empty space .  there are spaceports far in the outskirts but nothing in the city itself .  the one not so large does have empty space  so it will be easier to come down in its midst  though not in formal spaceports but then  who would care about that .    pelorat grimaced .   do you want me to make the decision  golan .     no  i ll make the decision .  i just want your thoughts .     for what they re worth  a large sprawling city is likely to be a commercial or manufacturing center .  a smaller city with open space is likely to be an administrative center .  it s the administrative center we d want .  does it have monumental buildings .     what do you mean by a monumental building .    pelorat smiled his tight little stretching of the lips .   i scarcely know .  fashions change from world to world and from time to time .  i suspect  though  that they always look large  useless  and expensive .   like the place where we were on comporellon .    trevize smiled in his turn .   it s hard to tell looking straight down  and when i get a sideways glance as we approach or leave  it s too confusing .  why do you prefer the administrative center .     that s where we re likely to find the planetary museum  library  archives  university  and so on .     good .  that s where we ll go  then  the smaller city .   and maybe we ll find something .  we ve had two misses  but maybe we ll find something this time .     perhaps it will be three times lucky .    trevize raised his eyebrows .   where did you get that phrase .     it s an old one   said pelorat .   i found it in an ancient legend .  it means success on the third try  i should think .       that sounds right   said trevize .   very well  then three times lucky  janov .      chapter       moss       .     trevize looked grotesque in his space suit .  the only part of him that remained outside were his holsters not the ones that he strapped around his hips ordinarily  but more substantial ones that were part of his suit .  carefully  he inserted the blaster in the right hand holster  the neuronic whip in the left .  again  they had been recharged and this time  he thought grimly  nothing would take them away from him .   bliss smiled .   are you going to carry weapons even on a world without air or  never mind .  i won t question your decisions .    trer   o paid   good .   and turned to help pelorat adjust his helmet  before donning his own .   pelorat  who had never worn a space suit before  said  rather plaintively   will i really be able to breathe in this thing  golan .     i promise you   said trevize .   bliss watched as the final joints were sealed  her arm about fallom s shoulder .  the young solarian stared at the two space suited figures in obvious alarm .  she was trembling  and bliss s arm squeezed her gently and reassuringly .   the airlock door opened  and the two stepped inside  their bloated arms waving a farewell .  it closed .  the mainlock door opened and they stepped clumsily onto the soil of a dead world .   it was dawn .  the sky was clear  of course  and purplish in color  but the sun had not yet risen .  along the lighter horizon where the sun would come  there was a slight haze .   pelorat said   it s cold .     do you feel cold .   said trevize  with surprise .  the suits were well insulated and if there was a problem  now and then  it was with the getting rid of body heat .   pebrat said   not at all  but look     his radioed voice sounded trevize s ear  and his finger pointed .   in the purplish light of dawn  the crumbling stone front of the building they were approaching was sheathed in hoar frost .   trevize said   with a thin atmosphere  it would get colder at night than you would expect  and warmer in the day .  right now it s the coldest part of  the day and it should take several hours before it gets too hot for us to remain in the sun .    as though the word had been a cabalistic incantation  the rim of the sun appeared above the horizon .    don t look at it   said trevize conversationally .   your face plate is reflective and ultraviolet opaque  but it would still be dangerous .    he turned his back to the rising sun and let his long shadow fall on the building .  the sunlight was causing the frost to disappear  even as he watched .  for a few moments  the wall looked dark with dampness and then that disappeared  too .   trevize said   the buildings don t look as good down here as they looked from the sky .  they re cracked and crumbling .  that s the result of the temperature change  i suppose  and of having the water traces freeze and melt each night and day for maybe as much as twenty thousand years .    pelorat said   there are letters engraved in the stone above the entrance  but crumbling has made them difficult to read .     can you make it out  janov .     a financial institution of some sort .  at least i make out a word which may be  bank .      what s that .     a building in which assets were stored  withdrawn  traded  invested  loaned if it s what i think it is .     a whole building devoted to it .  no computers .     without computers taking over altogether .    trevize shrugged .  he did not find the details of ancient history inspiring .   they moved about  with increasing haste  spending less time at sac build ing .  the silence  the deadness  was completely depressing .  the slow millennial long collapse into which they had intruded made the place seem like the skeleton of a city  with everything gone but the bones .   they were well up in the temperate zone  but trevize imagined he could feel the heat of the sun on his back .   pelorat  about a hundred meters to his right  said sharply   look at that .    trevize s ears rang .  he said   don t shout  janov .  i can hear your whispers clearly no matter how far away you are .  what is it .    pelorat  his voice moderating at once  said   this building is the  hall of the worlds .   at least  that s what i think the inscription reads .    trevize joined him .  before them was a three story structure  the line of its roof irregular and loaded with large fragments of rock  as though some sculptured object that had once stood there had fallen to pieces .    are you sure .   said trevize .    if we go in  we ll find out .    they climbed five low  broad steps  and crossed a space wasting plaza .  in the thin sir  their metal shod footsteps made a whispering vibration rather than a sound .    i see what you mean by  large  useless  and expensive     muttered trevize .   they entered a wide and high hall  with sunlight shining through tall windows and illuminating the interior too harshly where it struck and yet leaving things obscure in the shadow .  the thin atmosphere scattered little light .   in the center was a larger than life size human figure in what seemed to be a synthetic stone .  one arm had fallen off .  the other arm was cracked at the shoulder and trevize felt that if he tapped it sharply that arm  too  would break off .  he stepped back as though getting too near might tempt him into such unbearable vandalism .    i wonder who that is .   said trevize .   no markings anywhere .  i suppose those who set it up felt that his fame was so obvious he needed no identification  but now   he felt himself in danger of growing philosophical and turned his attention away .   pelorat was looking up  and trevize s glance followed the angle of pelorat s head .  there were markings  carvings  on the wall which trevize could not read .    amazing   said pelorat .   twenty thousand years old  perhaps  and  in here  protected somewhat from sun and damp  they re still legible .     not to me   said trevize .    it s in old script and ornate even for that .  let s see now seven one two   his voice died away in a mumble  and then he spoke up again .   there are fifty names listed and there are supposed to have been fifty spacer worlds and this is  the hall of the worlds .   i assume those are the names of the fifty spacer worlds  probably in the order of establishment .  aurora is first and solaria is last .  if you ll notice  there are seven columns  with seven names in the first six columns and then eight names in the last .  it is as though they had planned a seven by seven grid and then added solaria after the fact .  my guess  old chap  is that that list dates back to before solaria was terraformed and populated .     and which one is this planet we re standing on .  can you tell .    pelorat said   you ll notice that the fifth one down in the third column  the nineteenth in order  is inscribed in letters a little larger than the others .  the listers seem to have been self centered enough to give themselves some pride of place .  besides     what does the name read .     as near as i can make out  it says melpomenia .  it s a name i m totally unfamiliar with .     could it represent earth .    pelorat shook his head vigorously  but that went unseen inside his helmet .  he said   there are dozens of words used for earth in the old legends .  gaia is one of them  as you know .  so is terra  and erda  and so on .  they re all short .  i don t know of any long name used for it  or anything even resembling a short version of melpomenia .     then we re standing on melpomenia  and it s not earth .     yes .  and besides as i started to say earlier an even better indication than the larger lettering is that the co ordinates of melpomenia are given as          and you would expect co ordinates to be referred to one s own planet .     co ordinates .   trevize sounded dumbfounded .   that list gives the coordinates  too .     they give three figures for each and i presume those are co ordinates .  what else can they be .    trevize did not answer .  he opened a small compartment in the portion of the space suit that covered his right thigh and took out a compact device with wire connecting it to the compartment .  he put it up to his eyes and carefully focused it on the inscription on the wall  his sheathed fingers making a difficult job out of something that would ordinarily have been a moment s work .    camera .   asked pelorat unnecessarily .    it will feed the image directly into the ship s computer   said trevize .   he took several photographs from different angles  then said   wait .  i ve got to get higher .  help me  janov .    pelorat clasped his hands together  stirrup fashion  but trevize shook his head .   that won t support my weight .  get on your hands and knees .    pelorat did so  laboriously  and  as laboriously  trevize  having tucked the camera into its compartment again  stepped on pelorat s shoulders and from them on to the pedestal of the statue .  he tried to rock the statue carefully to judge its firmness  then placed his foot on one bent knee and used it as a base for pushing himself upward and catching the armless shoulder .  wedging his toes against some unevenness at the chest  he lifted himself and  finally  after several grunts  managed to sit on the shoulder .  to those long dead who had revered the statue and what it represented  what trevize did would have seemed blasphemy  and trevize was sufficiently influenced by that thought to try to sit lightly .    you ll fall and hurt yourself   pelorat called out anxiously .    i m not going to fall and hurt myself  but you might deafen me .   trevize unslung his camera and focused once more .  several more photographs were taken and then he replaced the camera yet again and carefully lowered himself till his feet touched the pedestal .  he jumped to the ground and the vibration of his contact was apparently the final push  for the still intact arm crumbled  and produced a small heap of rubble at the foot of the statue .  it made virtually no noise as it fell .   trevize froze  his first impulse being that of finding a place to hide before the watchman came and caught him .  amazing  he thought afterward  how quickly one relives the days of one s childhood in a situation like that when you ve accidentally broken something that looks important .  it lasted only a moment  but it cut deeply .   pelorat s voice was hollow  as befitted one who had witnessed and even abetted an act of vandalism  but he managed to find words of comfort .   it s   it s all right  golan .  it was about to come down by itself  anyway .    he walked over to the pieces on the pedestal and floor as though he were going to demonstrate the point  reached out for one of the larger fragments  and then said   golan  come here .    trevize approached and pelorat  pointing at a piece of stone that had clearly been the portion of the arm that had been joined to the shoulder  said   what is this .    trevize stared .  there was a patch of fuzz  bright green in color .  trevize rubbed it gently with his suited finger .  it scraped off without trouble .    it looks a lot like moss   he said .    the life without mind that you mentioned .     i m not completely sure how far without mind .  bliss  i imagine  would insist that this had consciousness  too but she would claim this stone also had it .    pelorat said   do you suppose that moss stuff is what s crumbling the rock .    trevize said   i wouldn t be surprised if it helped .  the world has plenty of sunlight and it has some water .  half what atmosphere it has is water vapor .  the rest is nitrogen and inert gases .  just a trace of carbon dioxide  which would lead one to suppose there s no plant life but it could be that the carbon dioxide is low because it is virtually all incorporated into the rocky crust .  now if this rock has some carbonate in it  perhaps this moss breaks it down by secreting acid  and then makes use of the carbon dioxide generated .  this may be the dominant remaining form of life on this planet .     fascinating   said pelorat .    undoubtedly   said trevize   but only in a limited way .  the co ordinates of the spacer worlds are rather more interesting but what we really want are the co ordinates of earth .  if they re not here  they may be elsewhere in the building or in another building .  come  janov .     but you know  began pelorat .    no  no   said trevize impatiently .   we ll talk later .  we ve got to see what else  if anything  this building can give us .  it s getting warmer .   he looked  . the small temperature reading on the back of his left glove .   come  janov .    they tramped through the rooms  walking as gently as possible  not because they were making sounds in the ordinary sense  or because there was anyone to hear them  but because they were a little shy of doing further damage through vibration .   they kicked up some dust  which moved a short way upward and settled quickly through the thin air  and they left footmarks behind them .   occasionally  in some dim corner  one or the other would silently point out more samples of moss that were growing .  there seemed a little comfort in the presence of life  however low in the scale  something that lifted the deadly  suffocating feel of walking through a dead world  especially one in which artifacts all about showed that once  long ago  it had been an elaborately living one .   and then  pelorat said   i think this must be a library .    trevize looked about curiously .  there were shelves and  as he looked more narrowly  what the corner of his eye had dismissed as mere ornamentation  seemed as though they might well be book films .  gingerly  he reached for one .  they were thick and clumsy and then he realized they were only cases .  he fumbled with his thick fingers to open one  and inside he saw several discs .  they were thick  too  and seemed brittle  though he did not test that .   he said   unbelievably primitive .     thousands of years old   said pelorat apologetically  as though defending the old melpomenians against the accusation of retarded technology .   trevize pointed to the spine of the film where there were dim curlicues of the ornate lettering that the ancients had used .   is that the title .  what does it say .    pelorat studied it .   i m not really sure  old man .  i think one of the words  refers to microscopic life .  it s a word for  microorganism   perhaps .  i suspect  these are technical microbiological terms which i wouldn t understand even  in standard galactic .       probably   said trevize morosely .   and  equally probably  it wouldn t do us any good even if we could read it .  we re not interested in germs .  do me a favor  janov .  glance through some of these books and see if there s anything there with an interesting title .  while you re doing that  i ll look over these book viewers .     is that what they are .   said pelorat  wondering .  they were squat  cubical structures  topped by a slanted screen and a curved extension at the top that might serve as an elbow rest or a place on which to put an electro notepad if they had had such on melpomenia .   trevize said   if this is a library  they must have book viewers of one kind or another  and this seems as though it might suit .    he brushed the dust off the screen very gingerly and was relieved that the screen  whatever it might be made of  did not crumble at his touch .  he manipulated the controls lightly  one after another .  nothing happened .  he tried another book viewer  then another  with the same negative results .   he wasn t surprised .  even if the device were to remain in working order for twenty millennia in a thin atmosphere and was resistant to water vapor  there was still the question of the power source .  stored energy had a way of leaking  no matter what was done to stop it .  that was another aspect of the all embracing  irresistible second law of thermodynamics .   pelorat was behind him .   golan .     yes .     i have a book film here     what kind .     i think it s a history of space flight .     perfect but it won t do us any good if i can t make this viewer work .    his hands clenched in frustration .    we could take the film back to the ship .     i wouldn t know how to adapt it to our viewer .  it wouldn t fit and our scanning system is sure to be incompatible .     but is all that really necessary  golan .  if we     it is really necessary  janov .  now don t interrupt me .  i m trying to decide what to do .  i can try adding power to the viewer .  perhaps that is all it needs .     where would you get the power .     well   trevize drew his weapons  looked at them briefly  then settled his blaster back into its holster .  he cracked open his neuronic whip  and studied the energy supply level .  it was at maximum .   trevize threw himself prone upon the floor and reached behind the viewer  he kept assuming that was what it was  and tried to push it forward .  it moved a small way and he studied what he found in the process .   one of those cables had to carry the power supply and surely it was the one that came out of the wall .  there was no obvious plug or joining .   how does one deal with an alien and ancient culture where the simplest taken for granted matters are made unrecognizable .    he pulled gently at the cable  then harder .  he turned it one way  then the other .  he pressed the wall in the vicinity of the cable  and the cable in the vicinity of the wall .  he turned his attention  as best he could  to the halfhidden back of the viewer and nothing he could do there worked  either .   he pressed one hand against the floor to raise himself and  as he stood up  the cable came with him .  what he had done that had loosened it  he hadn t the slightest idea .   it didn t look broken or torn away .  the end seemed quite smooth and it had left a smooth spot in the wall where it had been attached .   pelorat said softly   golan  may i    trevize waved a peremptory arm at the other .   not now  janov .  pleasel  he was suddenly aware of the green material caking the creases on his left glove .  he must have picked up some of the moss behind the viewer and crushed it .  his glove had a faint dampness to it  but it dried as he watched  and the greenish stain grew brown .   he turned his attention toward the cable  staring at the detached end carefully .  surely there were two small holes there .  wires could enter .   he sat on the floor again and opened the power unit of his neuronic whip .  carefully  he depolarized one of the wires and clicked it loose .  he then  slowly and delicately  inserted it into the hole  pushing it in until it stopped .  when he tried gently to withdraw it again  it remained put  as though it had been seized .  he suppressed his first impulse to yank it out again by force .  he depolarized the other wire and pushed it into the other opening .  it was conceivable that that would close the circuit and supply the viewer with power .    janov   he said   you ve played about with book films of all kinds .  see if you can work out a way of inserting that book into the viewer .     is it really nece     please  janov  you keep trying to ask unnecessary questions .  we only have so much time .  i don t want to have to wait far into the night for the building to cool off to the point where we can return .     it must go in this way   said janov   but     good   said trevize .   if it s a history of space flight  then it will have to begin with earth  since it was on earth that space flight was invented .  let s see if this thing works now .    pelorat  a little fussily  placed the book film into the obvious receptacle and then began studying the markings on the various controls for any hint as to direction .   trevize spoke in a low voice  while waiting  partly to ease his own tension .   i suppose there must be robots on this world  too here and there in reasonable order to all appearances glistening in the near vacuum .  the trouble is their power supply would long since have been drained  too  and  even if repowered  what about their brains .  levers and gears might withstand the millennia  but what about whatever microswitches or subatomic gizmos they had in their brains .  they would have to have deteriorated  and even if they had not  what would they know about earth .  what would they   pelorat said   the viewer is working  old chap .  see here .    in the dim light  the book viewer screen began to flicker .  it was only faint  but trevize turned up the power slightly on his neuronic whip and it grew brighter .  the thin air about them kept the area outside the shafts of sunlight comparatively dim  so that the room was faded and shadowy  and the screen seemed the brighter by contrast .   it continued to flicket  with occasional shadows drifting across the screen .    it needs to be focused   said trevize .    i know   said pelorat   but this seems the best i can do .  the film itself must have deteriorated .    the shadows came and went rapidly now  and periodically there seemed something like a faint caricature of print .  then  for a moment  there was sharpness and it faded again .    get that back and hold it  janov   said trevize .   pelorat was already trying .  he passed it going backward  then again forward  and then got it and held it .   eagerly  trevize tried to read it  then said  in frustration   can you make it out  janov .     not entirely   said pelorat  squinting at the screen .   it s about aurora .  i can tell that much .  i think it s dealing with the first hyperspatial expedition the  prime outpouring   it says .    he went forward  and it blurred and shadowed again .  he said finally   all the pieces i can get seem to deal with the spacer worlds  golan .  there s nothing i can find about earth .    trevize said bitterly   no  there wouldn t be .  it s all been wiped out on this world as it has on trantor .  turn the thing off .     but it doesn t matter   began pelorat  turning it off    because we can try other libraries .  it will be wiped out there  too .  everywhere .  do you know   he had looked at pelorat as he spoke  and now he stared at him with a mixture of horror and revulsion .   what s wrong with your face plate .   he asked .      .   pelorat automatically lifted his gloved hand to his face plate and then took it away and looked at it .    what is it .   he said  puzzled .  then  he looked at trevize and went on  rather squeakily   there s something peculiar about your face plate  golan .    trevize looked about automatically for a mirror .  there was none and he would need a light if there were .  he muttered   come into the sunlight  will you .    he half led  half pulled pelorat into the shaft of sunlight from the nearest window .  he could feel its warmth upon his back despite the insulating effect of the space suit .   he said   look toward the sun  janov  and close your eyes .    it was at once clear what was wrong with the face plate .  there was moss growing luxuriantly where the glass of the face plate met the metallized fabric of the suit itself .  the face plate was rimmed with green fuzziness and trevize knew his own was  too .   he brushed a finger of his glove across the moss on pelorat s face plate .  some of it came off  the crushed green staining the glove .  even as he watched it glisten in the sunlight  however  it seemed to grow stiffer and drier .  he tried again  and this time  the moss crackled off .  it was turning brown .  he brushed the edges of pelorat s face plate again  rubbing hard .    do mine  janov   he said .  then  later   do i look clean .  good  so do you .   let s go .  i don t think there s more to do here .    the sun was uncomfortably hot in the deserted airless city .  the stone buildings gleamed brightly  almost achingly .  trevize squinted as he looked at them and  as far as possible  walked on the shady side of the thoroughfares .  he stopped at a crack in one of the building fronts  one wide enough to stick his little finger into  gloved as it was .  he did just that  looked at it  muttered   moss   and deliberately walked to the end of the shadow and held that finger out in the sunlight for a while .   he said   carbon dioxide is the bottleneck .  anywhere they can get carbon dioxide decaying rock anywhere it will grow .  we re a good source of carbon dioxide  you know  probably richer than anything else on this nearly dead planet  and i suppose traces of the gas leak out at the boundary of the face plate .     so the moss grows there .     yes .    it seemed a long walk back to the ship  much longer and  of course  hotter than the one they had taken at dawn .  the ship was still in the shade when they got there  however  that much trevize had calculated correctly  at least .   pelorat said   look .    trevize saw .  the boundaries of the mainlock were outlined in green moss .    more leakage .   said pelorat .    of course .  insignificant amounts  i m sure  but this moss seems to be a better indicator of trace amounts of carbon dioxide than anything i ever heard of .  its spores must be everywhere and wherever a few molecules of carbon dioxide are to be found  they sprout .   he adjusted his radio for ship s wavelength and said   bliss  can you hear me .    bliss s voice sounded in both sets of oars .   yes .  are you ready to come in .  any luck .     we re just outside   said trevize   but don t open the lock .  we ll open it from out here .  repeat  don t open the lock .     why not .     bliss  just do as i ask  will you .  we can have a long discussion afterward .    trevize brought out his blaster and carefully lowered  its intensity to minimum  then gazed at it uncertainly .  he had never used it at minimum .  he looked about him .  there was nothing suitably fragile to test it on .   in sheer desperation  he turned it on the rocky hillside in whose shadow the fur star lay .   the target didn t turn red hot .  automatically  he felt the spot he had hit .  did  it feel warm .  he couldn t tell with any degree of certainty through the insulated fabric of his suit .   he hesitated again  then thought that the hull of the ship would be as resistant  within an order of magnitude at any rate  as the hillside .  he turned the blaster on the rim of the lock and flicked the contact briefly  holding his breath .   several centimeters of the moss like growth browned at once .  he waved his hand in the vicinity of the browning and even the mild breeze set up in the thin air in this way sufficed to set the light skeletal remnants that made up the brown material to scattering .    does it work .   said pelorat anxiously .    yes  it does   said trevize .   i turned the blaster into a mild heat ray .    he sprayed the heat all around the edge of the lock and the green vanished at the touch .  all of it .  he struck the mainlock to create a vibration that would knock off what remained and a brown dust fell to the ground a dust so fine that it even lingered in the thin atmosphere  buoyed up by wisps of gas .    i think we can open it now   said trevize  and  using his wrist controls  he tapped out the emission of the radio wave combination that activated the opening mechanism from inside .  the lock gaped and had not opened more than halfway when trevize said   don t dawdle  janov  get inside .   don t wait for the steps .  climb in .    trevize followed  sprayed the rim of the lock with his toned down blaster .  he sprayed the steps  too  once they had lowered .  he then signaled the close  of the lock and kept on spraying till they were totally enclosed .   trevize said   we re in the lock  bliss .  we ll stay here a few minutes .  continue to do nothing .    bliss s voice said   give me a hint .  are you all right .  how is pel .    pel said   i m here  bliss  and perfectly well .  there s nothing to worry about .     if you say so  pel  but there ll have to be explanations later .  i hope you know that .     it s a promise   said trevize  and activated the lock light .   the two space suited figures faced each other .   trevize said   we re pumping out all the planetary air we can  so let s just wait till that s done .     what about the ship air .  are we going to let that in .     not for a while .  i m as anxious to get out of the space suit as you are  janov .  i just want to make sure that we get rid of any spores that have entered with us or upon us .    by the not entirely satisfactory illumination of the lock light  trevize turned his blaster on the inner meeting of lock and hull  spraying the heat methodically along the floor  up and around  and back to the floor .    now you  janov .    pelorat stirred uneasily  and trevize said   you may feel warm .  it shouldn t be any worse than that .  if it grows uncomfortable  just say so .    he played the invisible beam over the face plate  the edges particularly  then  little by little  over the rest of the space suit .   he muttered   lift your arms  janov .   then   rest your arms on my shoulder  and lift one foot  i ve got to do the soles now the other .   are you getting too warm .    pelorat said   i m not exactly bathed in cool breezes  golan .     well  then  give me a taste of my own medicine .  go over me .     i ve never held a blaster .     you must hold it .  grip it so  and  with your thumb  push that little knob  and squeeze the holster tightly .  right .   now play it over my face plate .  move it steadily  janov  don t let it linger in one place too long .  over the rest of the helmet  then down the cheek and neck .    he kept up the directions  and when he had been heated everywhere and was in an uncomfortable perspiration as a result  he took back the blaster and studied the energy level .    more than half gone   he said  and sprayed the interior of the lock methodically  back and forth over the wall  till the blaster was emptied of its charge  having itself heated markedly through its rapid and sustained discharge .  he then restored it to its holster .   only then did he signal for entry into the ship .  he welcomed the hiss and feel of air coming into the lock as the inner door opened .  its coolness and its convective powers would carry off the warmth of the space suit far more quickly than radiation alone would do .  it might have been imagination  but he felt the cooling effect at once .  imagination or not  he welcomed that  too .    off with your suit  janov  and leave it out here in the lock   said trevize .    if you don t mind   said pelorat   a shower is what i would like to have before anything else .     not before anything else .  in fact  before that  and before you can empty your bladder  even  i suspect you will have to talk to bliss .    bliss was waiting for them  of course  and with a look of concern on her face .  behind her  peeping out  was fallom  with her hands clutching firmly at bliss s left arm .    what happened .   bliss asked severely .   what s been going on .     guarding against infection   said trevize dryly   so i ll be turning on the ultraviolet radiation .  break out the dark glasses .  please don t delay .    with ultraviolet added to the wall illumination  trevize took off his moist garments one by one and shook them out  turning them in one direction and another .    just a precaution   he said .   you do it  too  janov .   and  bliss  i ll have to peel altogether .  if that will make you uncomfortable  step into the next room .    bliss said   it will neither make me uncomfortable  nor embarrass me .  i have a good notion of what you look like  and it will surely present me with nothing new .   what infection .     just a little something that  given its own way   said trevize  with a deliberate air of indifference   could do great damage to humanity  i think .       .   it was all done .  the ultraviolet light had done its part .  officially  according to the complex films of information and instructions that had come with the far star when trevize had first gone aboard back on terminus  the light was there precisely for purposes of disinfection .  trevize suspected  however  that the temptation was always there  and sometimes yielded to  to use it for developing a fashionable tan for those who were from worlds where tans were fashionable .  the light was  however  disinfecting  however used .   they took the ship up into space and trevize maneuvered it as close to melpomenia s sun as he might without making them all unpleasantly uncomfortable  turning and twisting the vessel so as to make sure that its entire surface was drenched in ultraviolet .   finally  they rescued the two space suits that had been left in the lock and examined them until even trevize was satisfied .    all that   said bliss  at last   for moss .  isn t that what you said it was  trevize .  moss .     i call it moss   said trevize   because that s what it reminded me of .  i m not a botanist  however .  all i can say is that it s intensely green and can probably make do on very little light energy .     why very little .     the moss is sensitive to ultraviolet and can t grow  or even survive  in direct illumination .  its spores are everywhere and it grows in hidden corners  in cracks in statuary  on the bottom surface of structures  feeding on the energy of scattered photons of light wherever there is a source of carbon dioxide .    bliss said   i take it you think they re dangerous .     they might well be .  if some of the spores were clinging to us when we entered  or swirled in with us  they would find illumination in plenty without the harmful ultraviolet .  they would find ample water and an unending supply of carbon dioxide .     only   .    percent of our atmosphere   said bliss .    a great deal to them and   percent in our exhaled breath .  what if spores grew in our nostrils  and on our skin .  what if they decomposed and destroyed our food .  what if they produced toxins that killed us .  even if we labored to kill them but left some spores alive  they would be enough  when carried to another world by us  to infest it  and from there be carried to other worlds .  who knows what damage they might do .    bliss shook her head .   life is not necessarily dangerous because it is different .  you are so ready to kill .     that s gaia speaking   said trevize .    of course it is  but i hope i make sense  nevertheless .  the moss is adapted to the conditions of this world .  just as it makes use of light in small quantities but is killed by large  it makes use of occasional tiny whiffs of carbon dioxide and may be killed by large amounts .  it may not be capable of surviving on any world but melpomenia .     would you want me to take a chance on that .   demanded trevize .   bliss shrugged .   very well .  don t be defensive .  i see your point .  being an isolate  you probably had no choice but to do what you did .    trevize would have answered  but fallom s clear high pitched voice broke in  in her own language .   trevize said to pelorat   what s she saying .    pelorat began   what fallom is saying    fallom  however  as though remembering a moment too late that her own language was not easily understood  began again .   was there jemby there where you were .    the words were pronounced meticulously  and bliss beamed .   doesn t she speak galactic well .  and in almost no time .    trevize said  in a low voice   i ll mess it up if i try  but you explain to her  bliss  that we found no robots on the planet .     i ll explain it   said pelorat .   come  fallom .   he placed a gentle arm about the youngster s shoulders .   come to our room and i ll get you another book to read .     a book .  about jemby .     not exactly   and the door closed behind them .    you know   said trevize  looking after them impatiently   we waste our time playing nursemaid to that child .     waste .  in what way does it interfere with your search for earth  trevize .   in no way .  playing nursemaid establishes communication  however  allays fear  supplies love .  are these achievements nothing .     that s gaia speaking again .     yes   said bliss .   let us be practical  then .  we have visited three of the old spacer worlds and we have gained nothing .    trevize nodded .   true enough .     in fact  we have found each one dangerous  haven t we .  on aurora  there were feral dogs  on solaria  strange and dangerous human beings  on melpomenia  a threatening moss .  apparently  then  when a world is left to itself  whether it contains human beings or not  it becomes dangerous to the interstellar community .     you can t consider  that a general rule .     throe out of throe certainly seems impressive .     and how does it impress you  bliss .     i ll tell you .  please listen to me with an open mind .  if you have millions of interacting worlds in the galaxy  as is  of course  the affil case  and if .  each is made up entirely of isolates  as they are  then on each world  human beings are dominant and can force their will on nonhuman life forms  on the inanimate geological background  and even on each other .  the galaxy is  then  a very primitive and fumbling and misfunctioning galaxia .  the beginnings of a unit .  do you see what i mean .     i see what you re trying to say but that doesn t mean i m going to agree with you when you re done saying it .     just listen to me .  agree or not  as you please  but listen .  the only way the galaxy will work  . is as a proto galaxia  and the less proto and the more galaxia  the better .  the galactic empire was an attempt at a strong proto galaxia  and when it fell apart  times grew rapidly worse and there was the constant drive to strengthen the proto galaxia concept .  the foundation confederation is such an attempt .  so was the mule s empire .  so is the empire the second foundation is planning .  but even if there were no such empires or confederations  even if  the entire galaxy were in turmoil  it would be a connected turmoil  with each world interacting  even if only hostilely  with every other .  that would  in itself  be a kind of union and it would not yet be the worst case .     what would be the worst  then .     you know the answer to that  trevize .  you ve seen it .  if a human inhabited world breaks up completely  is truly isolate  and if it loses all interaction with other human worlds  it develops malignantly .     a cancer  then .     yes .  isn t solaria just that .  its hand is against all worlds .  and on it  the hand of each individual is against those of all others .  you ve seen it .  and if human beings disappear altogether  the last trace of discipline goes .  the each against each becomes unreasoning  as with the dogs  or is merely an elemental force as with the moss .  you see  i suppose  that the closer we are to galaxia  the better the society .  why  then  stop at anything short of galaxia .    for a while  trevize stared silently at bliss .   i m thinking about it .  but why this assumption that dosage is a one way thing  that if a little is good  a lot is better  and all there is is best of all .  didn t you yourself point out that it s possible the moss is adapted to very little carbon dioxide so that a plentiful supply might kill it .  a human being two meters tall is better off than one who is one meter tall  but is also better off than one who is three meters tall .  a mouse isn t better off  if it is expanded to the size of an elephant .  he wouldn t live .  nor would an elephant be better off reduced to the size of a mouse .    there s natural size  a natural complexity  some optimum quality for everything  whether star or atom  and it s certainly true of living things and living societies .  i don t say the old galactic empire was ideal  and i csfa certainly see saws in the foundation confederation  but rm not prey say that because total isolation is bad  total unification is good .  the eats  may both be equally horrible  and an old fashioned galactic empire  however imperfect  may be the best we can do .    bliss shook her head .   i wonder if you believe yourself  trevize .  are you going to argue that a virus and a human being are equally unsatisfactory  and wish to settle for something in between like a slime mold .     no .  but i might argue that a virus and a superhuman being are equally unsatisfactory  and wish to settle for something in between like an ordinary person .   there is  however  no point in arguing .  i will have my solution when i find earth .  on melpomenia  we found the co ordinates of forty seven other spacer worlds .     and you ll visit them all .     every one  if i have to .     risking the dangers on each .     yes  if that s what it takes to find earth .      pelorat had emerged from the room within which he had left fallow  and seemed about to say something when he was caught up in the rapid fire exchange between bliss and trevize .  he stared from one to the other as they spoke in turn .    how long would it take .   asked bliss .    however long it takes   said trevize   and we ought find what we need on y the next one we visit .     or on none of them .     that we cannot know till we search .    and now  at last  pelorat managed to insert a word .   but why look  golan .  we have the answer .    trevize waved an impatient hand in the direction of pelorat  checked the  motion  turned his head  and said blankly   what .         i said we have the answer .  i tried to tell you this on melpomenia at least five times  but you were so wrapped up in what you were doing     what answer do we have .  what are you talking about .       about earth .  i think we know where earth is .      part six   alpha    chapter       the center of the worlds       .     trevize stared at pelorat for a long moment  and with an expression of clear displeasure .  then he said   is there something you saw that i did not  and that you did not tell me about .     no   answered pelorat mildly .   you saw it and  as i just said  i tried to explain  but you were in no mood to listen to me .     well  try again .    bliss said   don t bully him  trevize .     i m not bullying him .  i m asking for information .  and don t you baby him .     please   said pelorat   listen to me  will you  and not to each other .   do you remember  golan  that we discussed early attempts to discover the origin of the human species .  yariff s project .  you know  trying to plot the times of settlement of various planets on the assumption that planets would be settled outward from the world of origin in all directions alike .  then  as we moved from newer to older planets  we would approach the world of origin from all directions .    trevize nodded impatiently .   what i remember is that it didn t work because the dates of settlement were not reliable .     that s right  old fellow .  but the worlds that yariff was working with were part of the second expansion of the human race .  by then  hyperspatial travel was far advanced  and settlement must have grown quite ragged .  leapfrogging very long distances was very simple and settlement didn t necessarily proceed outward in radial symmetry .  that surely added to the problem of unreliable dates of settlement .    but just think for a moment  golan  of the spacer worlds .  they were in the first wave of settlement .  hyperspatial travel was less advanced then  and there was probably little or no leapfrogging .  whereas millions of worlds were settled  perhaps chaotically  during the second expansion  only fifty were settled  probably in an orderly manner  in the first .  whereas the millions of worlds of the second expansion were settled over a period of twenty thousand years  the fifty of the first expansion were settled over a period of a few centuries almost instantaneously  in comparison .  those fifty  taken together  should exist in roughly spherical symmetry about the world of origin .    we have the co ordinates of the fifty worlds .  you photographed them  remember  from the statue .  whatever or whoever it is that is destroying information that concerns earth  either overlooked those co ordinates  or didn t stop to think that they would give us the information we need .  all you have to do  golan  is to adjust the co ordinates to allow for the last twenty thousand years of stellar motions  then find the center of the sphere .  you ll end up fairly close to earth s sun  or at least to where it was twenty thousand years ago .    trevize s mouth had fallen slightly open during the recital and it took a few moments for him to close it after pelorat was done .  he said   now why didn t i think of that .     i tried to tell you while we were still on melpomenia .     i m sure you did .  i apologize  janov  for refusing to listen .  the fact is it didn t occur to me that   he paused in embarrassment .   pelorat chuckled quietly   that i could have anything of importance to say .  i suppose that ordinarily i wouldn t  but this was something in my own field  you see .  i am sure that  as a general rule  you d be perfectly justified in not listening to me .     never   said trevize .   that s not so  janov .  i feel like a fool  and i well deserve the feeling .  my apologies again and i must now get to the computer .    he and pelorat walked into the pilot room  and pelorat  as always  watched with a combination of marveling and incredulity as trevize s hands settled down upon the desk  and he became what was almost a single man computer organism .    i ll have to make certain assumptions  janov   said trevize  rather blankfaced from computer absorption .   i have to assume that the first number is a distance in parsecs  and that the other two numbers are angles in radians  the first being up and down  so to speak  and the other  right and left .  i have to assume that the use of plus and minus in the case of the angles is galactic standard and that the zero zero zero mark is melpomenia s sun .     that sounds fair enough   said pelorat .    does it .  there are six possible ways of arranging the numbers  four possible ways of arranging the signs  distances may be in light years rather than parsecs  the angles in degrees  rather than radians .  that s ninety six diferent variations right there .  add to that  the point that if the distances are lightyears  i m uncertain as to the length of the year used .  add also the fact that i don t know the actual conventions used to measure the angles from the melpomenian equator in one case  i suppose  but what s their prime merid   pelorat frowned .   now you make it sound hopeless .     not hopeless .  aurora and solaria are included in the list  and i know where they are in space .  i ll use the co ordinates  and see if i can locate them .  if i end up in the wrong place  i will adjust the co ordinates until they give me the right place  and that will tell me what mistaken assumptions i am making as far as the standards governing the co ordinates are concerned .  once my assumptions are corrected  i can look for the center of the sphere .     with all the possibilities for change  won t it make it difficult to decide what to do .     what .   said trevize .  he was increasingly absorbed .  then  when pelorat repeated the question  he said   oh well  chances are that the co ordinates follow the galactic standard and adjusting for an unknown prime meridian isn t difficult .  these systems for locating points in space were worked out long ago  and most astronomers are pretty confident they even antedate interstellar travel .  human beings are very conservative in some ways and virtually never change numerical conventions once they grow used to them .  they even come to mistake them for laws of nature  i think .   which is just as well  for if every world had its own conventions of measurement that changed every century  i honestly think scientific endeavor would stall and come to a permanent stop .    he was obviously working while he was talking  for his words came haltingly .  and now he muttered   but quiet now .    .   after that  his face grew furrowed and concentrated until  after several minutes  he leaned back and drew a long breath .  he said quietly   the conventions hold .  i ve located aurora .  there s no question about it .   see .    pelorat stared at the field of stars  and at the bright one near the center and said   are you sure .    trevize said   my own opinion doesn t matter .  the computer is sure .  we ve visited aurora  after all .  we have its characteristics its diameter  mass  luminosity  temperature  spectral details  to say nothing of the pattern of neighboring stars .  the computer says it s aurora .     then i suppose we must take its word for it .     believe me  we must .  let me adjust the viewscreen and the computer can get to work .  it has the fifty sets of co ordinates and it will use them one at a time .    trevize was working on the screen as he spoke .  the computer worked in the four dimensions of space time routinely  but  for human inspection  the viewscreen was rarely needed in more than two dimensions .  now the screen seemed to unfold into a dark volume as deep as it  was tall and broad .  trevize dimmed the room lights almost totally to make the view of star shine easier to observe .    it will begin now   he whispered .   a moment later  a star appeared then another then another .  the view on the screen shifted with every addition so that all might be included .  it was as though space was moving backward from the eye so that a more and more panoramic view could be taken .  .  combine that with shifts up or down  right or left   eventually  fifty dots of light appeared  hovering in three dimensional space .   trevize said   i would have appreciated a beautiful spherical arrangement  but this looks like the skeleton of a snowball that had been patted into shape in a big hurry  out of snow that was too hard and gritty .     does that ruin everything .     it introduces some difficulties  but that can t be helped  i suppose .  the stars themselves aren t uniformly distributed  and certainly habitable planets aren t  so there are bound to be unevennesses in the establishment of new worlds .  the computer will adjust each of those dots to its present position  allowing for its likely motion in the last twenty thousand years even in that time it won t mean much of an adjustment and then fit them all into a  bestsphere .   it will find a spherical surface  in other words  from which the distance of all the dots is a minimum .  then we find the center of the sphere  and earth should be fairly close to that center .  or so we hope .   it won   t take long .       .   it didn t .  trevize  who was used to accepting miracles from the computer  found himself astonished at how little time it took .   trevize had instructed the computer to sound a soft  reverberating note upon deciding upon the co ordinates of the best center .  there was no reason for that  except for the satisfaction of hearing it and knowing that perhaps the search had been ended .   the sound came in a matter of minutes  and was like the gentle stroking of a mellow gong .  it swelled till they could feel the vibration physically  and then slowly faded .   bliss appeared at the door almost at once .   what s that .   she asked  her eyes big .   an emergency .    trevize said   not at all .    pelorat added eagerly   we may have located earth  bliss .  that sound was the computer s way of saying so .    she walked into the room .   i might have been warned .    trevize said   i m sorry  bliss .  i didn t mean it to be quite that loud .    fallom had followed bliss into the room and said   why was there that sound  bliss .     i see she s curious  too   said trevize .  he sat back  feeling drained .  the next step was to try the finding on the real galaxy  to focus on the coordinates of the center of the spacer worlds and see if a g type star was actually present .  once again  he was reluctant to take the obvious step  unable to make himself put the possible solution to the actual test .    yes   said bliss .   why shouldn t she .  she s as human as we are .     her parent wouldn t have thought so   said trevize abstractedly .   i worry about the kid .  she s bad news .     in what way has she proven so .   demanded bliss .   trevize spread his arms .   just a feeling .    bliss gave him a disdainful look  and turned to fallom .   we are trying to locate earth  fallom .       what s earth .     another world  but a special one .  it s the world our ancestors came from .  do you know what the word  ancestors  means from your reading  fallom .     does it mean  .   but the last word was not in galactic .   pelorat said   that s an archaic word for  ancestors   bliss .  our word  forebears  is closer to it .     very well   said bliss  with a sudden brilliant smile .   earth is the world where our forebears came from  fallom .  yours and mine and pel   s and trevize s .     yours  bliss and mine also .   fallom sounded puzzled .   both of them .     there s just one set of forebears   said bliss .   we had the same forebears  all of us .    trevize said   it sounds to me as though the child knows very well that she s different from us .    bliss said to trevize in a low voice   don t say that .  she must be made to see she isn t .  not in essentials .     hermaphrodism is essential  i should think .     i m talking about the mind .     transducer lobes are essential  too .     now  trevize  don t be difficult .  she s intelligent and human regardless of details .    she turned to fallom  her voice rising to its normal level .   think quietly about this  fallom  and see what it means to you .  your forebears and mine were the same .  all the people on all the worlds many  many worlds all had the same forebears  and those forebears lived originally on the world named earth .  that means we re all relatives  doesn t it .   now go back to our room and think of that .    fallom  after bestowing a thoughtful look on trevize  turned and ran off  hastened on by bliss s affectionate slap on her backside .   bliss turned to trevize  and said   please  trevize  promise me you won t make any comments in her hearing that will lead her to think she s different from us .    trevize said   i promise .  i have no wish to impede or subvert the educational procedure  but  you know  she is different from us .     in ways .  as i m different from you  and as pel is .     don t be naive  bliss .  the differences in fallom s case are much greater .     a little greater .  the similarities are vastly more important .  she  and her people  will be part of galaxia some day  and a very useful part  i m sure .     all right .  we won t argue .   he turned to the computer with clear reluctance .   and meanwhile  i m afraid i have to check the supposed position of earth in real space .     afraid .     well   trevize lifted his shoulders in what he hoped was a half humorous way   what if there s no suitable star near the place .     then there isn t   said bliss .    i m wondering if there s any point in checking it out now .  we won t be able to make a jump for several days .     and you ll be spending them agonizing over the possibilities .  find out now .  waiting won t change matters .    trevize sat there with his lips compressed for a moment  then said   you re right .  very well  then here goes .    he turned to the computer  placed his hands on the handmarks on the desk  and the viewscreen went dark .   bliss said   i ll leave you  then .  i ll make you nervous if i stay .   she left  with a wave of her hand .    the thing is   he muttered   that we re going to be checking the computer s galactic map first and even if earth s sun is in the calculated position  the map should not include it .  but we ll then    his voice trailed off in astonishment as the viewscreen flashed with a background of stars .  these were fairly numerous and dim  with an occasional brighter one sparkling here and there  well scattered over the face of the screen .  but quite close to the center was a star that was brighter than all the rest .    we ve got it   said pelorat jubilantly .   we ve got it  old chap .  look how bright it is .     any star at centered co ordinates would look bright   said trevize  clearly trying to fight off any initial jubilation that might prove unfounded .   the view  after all  is presented from a distance of a parsec from the centered co ordinates .  still  that centered star certainly isn t a red dwarf  or a red giant  or a hot blue white .  wait for information  the computer is checking its data banks .    there was silence for a few seconds and then trevize said   spectral class g   .   another pause  then   diameter    .   million kilometers mass    .    times that of terminus s sun surface temperature        absolute rotation slow  just under thirty days no unusual activity or irregularity .    pelorat said   isn t all that typical of the kind of star about which habitable planets are to be found .     typical   said trevize  nodding in the dimness .   and  therefore  what we d expect earth s sun to be like .  if that is where life developed  the sun of earth would have set the original standard .     so there is a reasonable chance that there would be a habitable planet circling it .     we don t have to speculate about that   said trevize  who sounded puzzled indeed over the matter .   the galactic map lists it as possessing a planet with human life but with a question mark .    pelorat s enthusiasm grew .   that s exactly what we would expect  golan .  the life bearing planet is there  but the attempt to hide the fact obscures data concerning it and leaves the makers of the map the computer uses uncertain .     no  that s what bothers me   said trevize .   that s not what we should expect .  we should expect far more than that .  considering the efficiency with which data concerning earth has been wiped out  the makers of the map should not have known that life exists in the system  let alone human life .  they should not even have known earth s sun exists .  the spacer worlds aren t on the map .  why should earth s sun be .     well  it s there  just the same .  what s the use of arguing the fact .  what other information about the star is given .     a name .       ah .  what is it .     alpha .    there was a short pause  then pelorat said eagerly   that s it  old man .  that s the final bit of evidence .  consider the meaning .     does it have a meaning .   said trevize .   it s just a name to me  and an odd one .  it doesn t sound galactic .     it isn t galactic .  it s in a prehistoric language of earth  the same one that gave us gaia as the name of bliss s planet .     what does alpha mean  then .     alpha is the first letter of the alphabet of that ancient language .  that is one of the most firmly attested scraps of knowledge we have about it .  in ancient times   alpha  was sometimes used to mean the first of anything .  to call a sun  alpha   implies that it s the first sun .  and wouldn t the first sun be the one around which a planet revolved that was the first planet to bear human  life earth .     are you sure of that .     absolutely   said pelorat .    is there anything in early legends .  you re the mythologist  after all that gives earth s sun some very unusual attribute .     no  how can there be .  it has to be standard by definition  and the characteristics the computer has given us ate as standard as possible  i imagine .  aren t they .     earth s sun is a single star  i suppose .    pelorat said   well  of course .  as far as i know  all inhabited worlds orbit single stars .     so i would have thought myself   said trevize .   the trouble is that that star in the center of the viewscreen is not a single star  it is a binary .  the brighter of the two stars making up the binary is indeed standard and it is that one for which the computer supplied us with data .  circling that star with a period of roughly eighty years  however  is another star with a mass four fifths that of the brighter one .  we can t see the two as separate stars with the unaided eye  but if i were to enlarge the view  i m sure we would .     are you certain of that  golan .   said pelorat  taken aback .    it s what the computer is telling me .  and if we are looking at a binary star  then it s not earth s sun .  it can t be .       .   trevize broke contact with the computer  and the lights brightened .   that was the signal  apparently  for bliss to return  with fallow tagging after her .   well  then  what are the results .   she asked .   trevize said tonelessly   somewhat disappointing .  where i expected to find earth s sun  i found a binary star  instead .  earth s sun is a single star  so the one centered is not it .    pelorat said   now what  golan .    trevize shrugged .   i didn t really expect to see earth s sun centered .  even the spacers wouldn t settle worlds in such a way as to set up an exact sphere .  aurora  the oldest of the spacer worlds  might have sent out settlers of its own and that may have distorted the sphere  too .  then  too  earth s sun may not have moved at precisely the average velocity of the spacer worlds .    pelorat said   so the earth can be anywhere .  is that what you re saying .     no .  not quite  anywhere .   all these possible sources of error can t amount to much .  earth s sun must be in the vicinity of the co ordinates .  the star we ve spotted almost exactly at the co ordinates must be a neighbor of earth s sun .  it s startling that there should be a neighbor that so closely resembles earth s sun except for being a binary but that must be the case .     but we would see earth s sun on the map  then  wouldn t we .  i mean  near alpha .     no  for i m certain earth s sun isn t on the map at all .  it was that which shook my confidence when we first spied alpha .  regardless of how much it might resemble earth s sun  the mere fact that it was on the map made me suspect it was not the real thing .     well  then   said bliss .   why not concentrate on the same co ordinates in real space .  then  if there is any bright star close to the center  a star that does not exist in the computer s map  and if it is very much like alpha in its properties  but is single  might it not be earth s sun .    trevize sighed .   if all that were so  i d be willing to wager half my fortune  such as it is  that circling that star you speak of would be the planet earth .   again  i hesitate to try .     because you might fail .    trevize nodded .   however   he said   just give me a moment or two to catch my breath  and i ll force myself to do so .    and while the three adults looked at each other  fallow approached the computer desk and stared curiously at the handmarks upon it .  she reached out her own hand tentatively toward the markings  and trevize blocked the motion with a swift outthrusting of his own arm and a sharp   mustn t touch  fallow .    the young solarian seemed startled  and retreated to the comfort of bliss s encircling arm .   pelorat said   we must face it  golan .  what if you find nothing in real space .     then we will be forced to go back to the earlier plan   said trevize   and visit each of the forty seven spacer worlds in turn .     and if that yields nothing  golan .    trevize shook his head in annoyance  as though to prevent that thought from taking too deep a root .  staring down at his knees  he said abruptly   then i will think of something else .     but what if there is no world of forebears at all .    trevize looked up sharply at the treble voice .   who said that .   he asked .   it was a useless question .  the moment of disbelief faded  and he knew very well who the questioner was .    i did   said fallow .   trevize looked at her with a slight frown .   did you understand the conversation .    fallow said   you are looking for the world of forebears  but you haven t found it yet .  maybe there isn t no such world .     any such world   said bliss softly .    no  fallow   said trevize seriously .   there has been a very big effort to hide it .  to try so hard to hide something means there is something there to hide .  do you understand what i am saying .     yes   said fallow .   you do not let me touch the hands on the deck .  because you do not let me do that means it would be interesting to touch them .     ah  but not for you  fallom .   bliss  you are creating a monster that will destroy us all .  don t ever let her in here unless i m at the desk .  and even then  think twice  will you .    the small byplay  however  seemed to have shaken him out of his irresolution .  he said   obviously  i had better get to work .  if i just sit here  uncertain as to what to do  that little fright will take over the ship .    the lights dimmed  and bliss said in a low voice   you promised  trevize .  do not call her a monster or a fright in her hearing .     then keep an eye on her  and teach her some manners .  tell her children should be never heard and seldom seen .    bliss frowned .   your attitude toward children is simply appalling  trevize .     maybe  but this is not the time to discuss the matter .    then he said  in tones in which satisfaction and relief were equally represented   there s alpha again in real space .   and to its left  and slightly upward  is almost as bright a star and one that isn t in the computer s galactic map .  that is earth s sun .  i ll wager all my fortune on it .       .    well  now   said bliss   we won t take any part of your fortune if you lose  so why not settle the matter in a forthright manner .  let s visit the star as soon as you can make the jump .    trevize shook his head .   no .  this time it s not a matter of irresolution or fear .  it s a matter of being careful .  three times we ve visited an unknown world and three times we ve come up against something unexpectedly dangerous .  and three times  moreover  we ve had to leave that world in a hurry .  this time the matter is ultimately crucial and i will not play my cards in ignorance again  or at least in any more ignorance than i can help .  so far  all we have are vague stories about radioactivity  and that is not enough .  by an odd chance that no one could have anticipated  there is a planet with human life about a parsec from earth     do we really know that alpha has a planet with human life on it .   put in pelorat .   you said the computer placed a question mark after that .     even so   said trevize   it s worth trying .  why not take a look at it .  if it does indeed have human beings on it  let us find out what they know about earth .  for them  after all  earth is not a distant thing of legend  it is a neighbor world  bright and prominent in their sky .    bliss said thoughtfully   it s not a bad idea .  it occurs to me that if alpha is inhabited and if the inhabitants are not your thoroughly typical isolates  they may be friendly  and we might be able to get some decent food for a change .     and meet some pleasant people   said trevize .   don t forget that .  will it be all right with you  janov .    pelorat said   you make the decision  old chap .  wherever you go  i will go  too .   fallom said suddenly   will we find jemby .    bliss said hastily  before trevize could answer   we will look for it  fallom .    and then trevize said   it s settled then .  on to alpha .       .    two big stars   said fallom  pointing to the viewscreen .    that s right   said trevize .   two of them .   bliss  do keep an eye on her .  i don t want her fiddling with anything .     she s fascinated by machinery   said bliss .    yes  i know she is   said trevize   but i m not fascinated by her fascination .   though to tell you the truth  i m as fascinated as she is at seeing two stars that bright in the viewscreen at the same time .    the two stars were bright enough to seem to be on the point of showing a disc each of them .  the screen had automatically increased filtration density in order to remove the hard radiation and dim the light of the bright stars so as to avoid retinal damage .  as a result  few other stars were bright enough to be noticeable  and the two that were reigned in haughty near isolation .    the thing is   said trevize   i ve never been this close to a binary system before .     you haven t .   said pelorat  open astonishment in his voice .   how is that possible .    trevize laughed .   i ve been around  janov  but i m not the galactic rover you think i am .    pelorat said   i was never in space at all till i met you  golan  but i always thought that anyone who did manage to get into space      would go everywhere .  i know .  that s natural enough .  the trouble with planet bound people is that no matter how much their mind may tell them otherwise  their imaginations just can t take in the true size of the galaxy .  we could travel all our lives and leave most of the galaxy unpenetrated and untouched .  besides  no one ever goes to binaries .     why not .   said bliss  frowning .   we on gaia know little astronomy compared to the traveling isolates of the galaxy  but i m under the impression that binaries aren t rare .     they re not   said trevize .   there are substantially more binaries than there are single stars .  however  the formation of two stars in close association upsets the ordinary processes of planetary formation .  binaries have less planetary material than single stars do .  such planets as do form about them often have relatively unstable orbits and are very rarely of a type that is reasonably habitable .    early explorers  i imagine  studied many binaries at close range but  after a while  for settlement purposes  they sought out only singles .  and  of course  once you have a densely settled galaxy  virtually all travel involves trade and communications and is carried on between inhabited worlds circling single stars .  in periods of military activity  i suppose bases were sometimes set up on small  otherwise uninhabited worlds circling one of the stars of a binary that happened to be strategically placed  but as hyperspatial travel came to be perfected  such bases were no longer necessary .    pelorat said humbly    . it s amazing how much i don t know .    trevize merely grinned .   don t let that impress you  janov .  when i was in the navy  we listened to an incredible number of lectures on outmoded military tactics that no one ever planned  or intended to use  and were just talked about out of inertia .  i was just rattling off a bit of one of them .   consider all you know about mythology  folklore  and archaic languages that i don t know  and that only you and a very few others do know .    bliss said   yes  but those two stars make up a binary system and one of them has an inhabited planet circling it .     we hope it does  bliss   said trevize .   everything has its exceptions .  and with an official question mark in this case  which makes it more puzzling .   no  fallom  those knobs are not toys .   bliss  either keep her in handcuffs  or take her out .     she won t hurt anything   said bliss defensively  but pulled the solarian youngster to herself just the same .   if you re so interested in that habitable planet  why aren t we there already .     for one thing   said trevize   i m just human enough to want to see this sight of a binary system at close quarters .  then  too  i m just human enough to be cautious .  as i ve already explained  nothing has happened since we left gaia that would encourage me to be anything but cautious .    pelorat said   which one of those stars is alpha  golan .     we won t get lost  janov .  the computer knows exactly which one is alpha  and  for that matter  so do we .  it s the hotter and yellower of the two because it s the larger .  now the one on the right has a distinct orange tinge to its light  rather like aurora s sun  if you recall .  do you notice .     yes  now that you call it to my attention .     very well .  that s the smaller one .   what s the second letter of that ancient language you speak of .    pelorat thought a moment  and said   beta .     then let s call the orange one beta and the yellow white one alpha  and it s alpha we re heading for right now .      chapter       new earth       .      four planets   muttered trevize .   all are small  plus a trailing off of asteroids .  no gas giants .    pelorat said   do you find that disappointing .     not really .  it s expected .  binaries that circle each other at small distances can have no planets circling one of the stars .  planets can circle the center of gravity of both  but it s very unlikely that they would be habitable too far away .        on the other hand if the binaries are reasonably separate  there can be planets in stable orbits about each  if they are close enough to one or the other of the stars .  these two stars  according to the computer s data bank  have an average separation of   .   billion kilometers and even at periastron  when they are closest together  are about   .   billion kilometers apart .  a planet in an orbit of less than     million kilometers from either star would be stably situated  but there can be no planet with a larger orbit .  that means no gas giants since they would have to be farther away from a star  but what s the difference .  gas giants aren t habitable  anyway .     but one of those four planets might be habitable .     actually the second planet is the only real possibility .  for one thing  it s the only one of them large enough to have an atmosphere .    they approached the second planet rapidly and over a period of two days its image expanded  at first with a majestic and measured swelling .  and then  when there was no sign of any ship emerging to intercept them  with increasing and almost frightening speed .     the far star was moving swiftly along a temporary orbit a thousand kilometers above the cloud cover  when trevize said grimly   i see why the computer s memory banks put a question mark after the notation that it was inhabited .  there s no clear sign of radiation  either light in the night hemisphere  or radio anywhere .     me cloud cover seems pretty thick   said pelorat .    that should not blank out radio radiation .    they watched the planet wheeling below them  a symphony in swirling white clouds  through occasional gaps of which a bluish wash indicated ocean .   trevize said   the cloud level is fairly heavy for an inhabited world .  it might be a rather gloomy one .   what bothers me most   he added  as they plunged once more into the night shadow   is that no space stations have hailed us .     the way they did back at comporellon  you mean .   said pelorat .    the way they would in any inhabited world .  we would have to stop for the usual checkup on papers  freight  length of stay  and so on .    bliss said   perhaps we missed the hail for some reason .     our computer would have received it at any wavelength they might have cared to use .  and we ve been sending out our own signals  but have roused no one and nothing as a result .  dipping under the cloud layer without communicating with station officials violates space courtesy  but i don t see that we have a choice .    the far star slowed  and strengthened its antigravity accordingly  so as to maintain its height .  it came out into the sunlight again  and slowed further .  trevize  in co ordination with the computer  found a sizable break in the clouds .  the ship sank and passed through it .  beneath them heaved the ocean in what must have been a fresh breeze .  it lay  wrinkled  several kilometers below  them  faintly striped in lines of froth .   they flew out of the sunlit patch and under the cloud cover .  the expanse of water immediately beneath them turned a slate gray  and the temperature dropped noticeably .   fallom  staring at the viewscreen  spoke in her own consonant rich language for a few moments  then shifted to galactic .  her voice trembled .   what is that which i see beneath .     that is an ocean   said bliss soothingly .   it is a very large mass of water .     why does it not dry up .    bliss looked at trevize  who said   there s too much water for it to dry up .   t  fallom said in a half choked manner   i don t want all that water .  let us go away .   and then she shrieked  thinly  as the far star moved through a patch of storm clouds so that the viewscreen turned milky and was streaked with the mark of raindrops .   the lights in the pilot room dimmed and the ship s motion became slightly jerky .   trevize looked up in surprise and cried out .   bliss  your fallow is old enough to transduce .  she s using electric power to try to manipulate the controls .  stop her .    bliss put her arms about fallom  and hugged her tightly   it s all right  fallom  it s all right .  there s nothing to be afraid of .  it s just another world  that s all .  there are many like this .    fallom relaxed somewhat but continued to tremble .   bliss said to trevize   the child has never seen an ocean  and perhaps  for all i know  never experienced fog or rain .  can t you be sympathetic .     not if she tampers with the ship .  she s a danger to all of us  then .  take her into your room and calm her down .    bliss nodded curtly .   pelorat said   i ll come with you  bliss .     no  no  pel   she responded .   you stay here .  i ll soothe fallom and you soothe trevize .   and she left .    i don t need soothing   growled trevize to pelorat .   i m sorry if i flew off the handle  but we can t have a child playing with the controls  can we .     of course we can t   said pelorat   but bliss was caught by surprise .  she can control fallom  who is really remarkably well behaved for a child taken from her home and her her robot  and thrown  willy nilly  into a life she doesn t understand .     i know .  it wasn t i who wanted to take her along  remember .  it was bliss s idea .     yes  but the child would have been killed  if we hadn t taken her .     well  i ll apologize to bliss later on .  to the child  too .    but he was still frowning  and pelorat said gently   golan  old chap  is there anything else bothering you .     the ocean   said trevize .  they had long emerged from the rain storm  but the clouds persisted .    what s wrong with it .   asked pelorat .    there s too much of it  that s all .    pelorat looked blank  and trevize said  with a snap   no land .  we haven t seen any land .  the atmosphere is perfectly normal  oxygen and nitrogen in decent proportions  so the planet has to be engineered  and there has to be plant life to maintain the oxygen level .  in the natural state  such atmospheres do not occur except  presumably  on earth  where it developed  who knows how .  but  then  on engineered planets there are always reasonable amounts of dry land  up to one third of the whole  and never less than a fifth .  so how can this planet be engineered  and lack land .    pelorat said   perhaps  since this planet is part of a binary system  it is completely atypical .  maybe it wasn t engineered  but evolved an atmosphere in ways that never prevail on planets about single stars .  perhaps life developed independently here  as it once did on earth  but only sea life .     even if we were to admit that   said trevize   it would do us no good .   there s no way life in the sea can develop a technology .  technology is always based on fire  and fire is impossible in the sea .  a life bearing planet without technology is not what we re looking for .     i realize that  but i m only considering ideas .  after all  as far as we know  technology only developed once  on earth .  everywhere else  the settlers brought it with them .  you can t say technology is  always  anything  if you only have one case to study .     travel through the sea requires streamlining .  sea life cannot have irregular outlines and appendages such as hands .     squids have tentacles .    trevize said   i admit we are allowed to speculate  but if you re thinking of intelligent squid like creatures evolving independently somewhere in the galaxy  and developing a technology not based on fire  you re supposing something not at all likely  in my opinion .     in your opinion    said pelorat gently .   suddenly  trevize laughed .   very well  janov .  i see you re logic chopping in order to get even with me for speaking harshly to bliss  and you re doing a good job .  i promise you that if we find no land  we will examine the sea as best we can to see if we can find your civilized squids .    as he spoke  the ship plunged into the night shadow again  and the viewscreen turned black .   pelorat winced .   i keep wondering   he said .   is this safe .     is what safe  janov .     racing through the dark like this .  we might dip  and dive into the ocean  and be destroyed instantly .     quite impossible  janov .  really .  the computer keeps us traveling along a gravitational line of force .  in other words  it remains always at a constant intensity of the planetary gravitational force which means it keeps us at a nearly constant height above sea level .     but how high .     nearly five kilometers .     that doesn t really console me  golan .  might we not reach land and smash into a mountain we don t see .     we don t see  but ship s radar will see it  and the computer will guide the ship around or over the mountain .     what if there s level land  then .  we ll miss it in the dark .     no  janov  we won t .  radar reflected from water is not at all like radar reflected from land .  water is essentially flat  land is rough .  for that reason  reflection from land is substantially more chaotic than reflection from water .  the computer will know the difference and it will let me know if there s land in view .  even if it were day and the planet were sun lit  the computer might well detect land before i would .    they fell silent and  in a couple of hours  they were back in daylight  with an empty ocean again rolling beneath them monotonously  but occasionally invisible when they passed through one of the numerous storms .  in one storm  the wind drove the far star out of its path .  the computer gave way  trevize explained  in order to prevent an unnecessary waste of energy and to minimize the chance of physical damage .  then  when the turbulence had passed  the computer eased the ship back into its path .    probably the edge of a hurricane   said trevize .   pelorat said   see here  old chap  we re just traveling west to east or east to west .  all we re examining is the equator .    trevize said   that would be foolish  wouldn t it .  we re following a great circle route northwest southeast .  that takes us through the tropics and both temperate zones and each time we repeat the circle  the path moves westward  as the planet rotates on its axis beneath us .  we re methodically crisscrossing the world .  by now  since we haven t hit land  the chances of a sizable continent are less than one in ten  according to the computer  and of a sizable island less than one in four  with the chances going down each circle we make .     you know what i would have done   said pelorat slowly  as the night hemisphere engulfed them again .   i d have stayed well away from the planet and swept the entire hemisphere facing me with radar .  the clouds wouldn t have mattered  would they .    trevize said   and then zoom to the other side and do the same there .  or just let the planet turn once .   that s hindsight  janov .  who would expect to approach a habitable planet without stopping at a station and being given a path or being excluded .  and if one went under the cloud layer without stopping at a station  who would expect not to find land almost at once .  habitable planets are land .     surely not all land   said pelorat .    i m not talking about that   said trevize  in sudden excitement .   i m saying we ve found land .  quiet .    then  with a restraint that did not succeed in hiding his excitement  trevize placed his hands on the desk and became part of the computer .  he said   it s an island about two hundred and fifty kilometers long and sixty five kilometers wide  more or less .  perhaps fifteen thousand square kilometers in area or thereabout .  not large  but respectable .  more than a dot on the map .  wait    the lights in the pilot room dimmed and went out .    what are we doing .   said pelorat  automatically whispering as though darkness were something fragile that must not be shattered .    waiting for our eyes to undergo dark adaptation .  the ship is hovering over the island .  just watch .  do you see anything .     no  little specks of light  maybe .  i m not sure .     i see them  too .  now i ll throw in the telescopic lam .    and there was light .  clearly visible .  irregular patches of it .    it s inhabited   said trevize .   it may be the only inhabited portion of the pest       what do we do .      we wait for daytime .  that gives us a few hours in which we can rest .     might they not attack us .     with what .  i detect almost no radiation except visible light and infrared .  it s inhabited and the inhabitants are clearly intelligent .  they have a technology  but obviously a preelectronic one  so i don t think there s anything to worry about up here .  if i should be wrong  the computer will warn me in plenty of time .     and once daylight comes .     we ll land  of course .       .   they came down when the first rays of the morning sun shone through a break in the clouds to reveal part of the island freshly green  with its interior marked by a line of low  rolling hills stretching into the purplish distance .   as they dropped closer  they could see isolated copses of trees and occasional orchards  but for the most part there were well kept farms .  immediately below them  on the southeastern shore of the island was a silvery beach backed by a broken line of boulders  and beyond it was a stretch of lawn .  they caught a glimpse of an occasional house  but these did not cluster into anything like a town .   eventually  they made out a dim network of roads  sparsely lined by dwelling places  and then  in the cool morning sir  they spied an sir car in the far distance .  they could only tell it was an au car  and not a bird  by the manner of its maneuvering .  it was the first indubitable sign of intelligent life in action they had yet seen on the planet .    it could be an automated vehicle  if they could manage that without electronics   said trevize .   bliss said   it might well be .  it seems to me that if there were a human being at the controls  it would be heading for us .  we must be quite a sight a vehicle sinking downward without the use of braking jets of rocket fire .     a strange sight on any planet   said trevize thoughtfully .   there can t be many worlds that have ever witnessed the descent of a gravitic space vessel .   the beach would make a fine landing place  but if the winds blow i don t want the ship inundated .  i ll make for the stretch of grass on the other side of the boulders .     at least   said pelorat   a gravitic ship won t scorch private property in descending .    down they came gently on the four broad pads that had moved slowly outward during the last stage .  these pressed down into the soil under weight of the ship .   pelorat  . said   i m afraid we ll  . leave marks  though .     at least   said bliss  and there was that in her voice that was not en approving   the climate is evidently equable .    i would even say  warm .      a human being was on the grass  watching the ship descend and showing no evidence of fear or surprise .  the look on her face showed only rapt interest .   she wore very little  which accounted for bliss s estimate of the c her sandals seemed to be of canvas  and about her hips was a wraparound skirt with a flowered pattern .  there were no leg coverings and there was nothing above her waist .   her hair was black  long  and very glossy  descending almost to her waist  her skin color was a pale brown and her eyes were narrow .   trevize scanned the surroundings and there was no other human being in sight .  he shrugged and said   well  it s early morning and the inhabitants may be mostly indoors  or even asleep .  still  i wouldn t say it was a well populated area .    he turned to the others and said   i ll go out and talk to the woman  if she   speaks anything comprehensible .  the rest of you     i should think   said bliss firmly   that we might as well all step out .  that woman looks completely harmless and  in any case  i want to stretch my legs and breathe planetary air  and perhaps arrange for planetary food .  i want fallow to get the feel of a world again  too  and i think pel would like to examine the woman at closer range .     who .  i .   said pelorat  turning faintly pink .   not at all  bliss  but i am the linguist of our little party .    trevize shrugged .   come one  come all .  still  though she may look harmless  i intend to take my weapons with me .     i doubt   said bliss   that you will be much tempted to use them on that young woman .    trevize grinned .   she is attractive  isn t she .    trevize left the ship first  then bliss  with one hand swung backward to enclose fallom s  who carefully made her way down the ramp after bliss .  pelorat was last .   the black haired young woman continued to watch with interest .  she did not back away an inch .   trevize muttered   well  let s try .    he held his arms away from his weapons and said   i greet you .    the young woman considered that for a moment  and said   i greet thee and i greet thy companions .    pelorat said joyfully   how wonderful .  she speaks classical galactic and with a correct accent .      i understand her  too   said trevize  oscillating one hand to indicate his understanding wasn t perfect .   i hope she understands me .    he said  smiling  and assuming a friendly expression   we come from across space .  we come from another world .     that is well   said the young woman  in her clear soprano .   comes thy ship from the empire .     it comes from a far star  and the ship is named far star .     the young woman looked up at the lettering on the ship .   is that what that sayeth .  if that be so  and if the first letter is an f  then  behold  it is imprinted backward .    trevize was about to object  but pelorat  in an ecstasy of joy  said   she s right .  the letter f did reverse itself about two thousand years ago .  what a marvelous chance to study classical galactic in detail and as a living language .    trevize studied the young woman carefully .  she was not much more than   .   meters in height  and her breasts  though shapely  were small .  yet she did not seem unripe .  the nipples were large and the areolae dark  though that might be the result of her brownish skin color .   he said   my name is golan trevize  my friend is janov pelorat  the woman is bliss  and the child is fallom .     is it the custom  then  on the far star from which you come  that the men be given a double name .  i am hiroko  daughter of hiroko .     and your father .   interposed pelorat suddenly .   to which hiroko replied with an indifferent shrug of her shoulder   his name  so sayeth my mother  is smool  but it is of no importance .  i know him not .     and where are the others .   asked trevize .   you seem to be the only one to be here to greet us .    hiroko said   many men are aboard the fishboats  many women are in the fields .  i take holiday these last two days and so am fortunate enough to see this great thing .  yet people are curious and the ship will have been seen as it descended  even from a distance .  others will be here soon .     are there many others on this island .     there are more than a score and five thousand   said hiroko with obvious pride .    and are there other islands in the ocean .     other islands  good sir .   she seemed puzzled .   trevize took that as answer enough .  this was the one spot on the entire planet that was inhabited by human beings .   he said   what do you call your world .     it is alpha  good sir .  we are taught that the whole name is alpha centauri  if that has more meaning to thee  but we call it alpha only and  see  it is a fair visaged world .     a what world .   said trevize  turning blankly to pelorat .    a beautiful world  she means   said pelorat .    that it is   said trevize   at least here  and at this moment .   he looked up at the mild blue morning sky  with its occasional drift of clouds .   you have a nice sunny day  hiroko  but i imagine there aren t many of those on alpha .    hiroko stiffened .   as many as we wish  sir .  the clouds may come when we need rain  but on most days it seemeth good to us that the sky is fair above .  surely a goodly sky and a quiet wind are much to be desired on those days when the fishboats are at sea .     do your people control the weather  then  hiroko .     did we not  sir golan trevize  we would be soggy with rain .     but how do you do that .     not being a trained engineer  sir  i cannot tell thee .     and what might be the name of this island on which you and your people live .   said trevize  finding himself trapped in the ornate sound of classical galactic  and wondering desperately if he had the conjugations right  .   hiroko said   we call our heavenly island in the midst of the vast sea of waters new earth .    at which trevize and pelorat stared at each other with surprise and delight .   there was no time to follow up on the statement .  others were arriving .  dozens .  they must consist of those  trevize thought  who were not on the ships or in the fields  and who were not from too far away .  they came on foot for the most part  though two ground cars were in evidence rather old and clumsy .   clearly  this was a low technology society  and yet they controlled the weather .   it was well known that technology was not necessarily all of a piece  that lack of advance in some directions did not necessarily exclude considerable advance in others but surely this example of uneven development was unusual .   of those who were now watching the ship  at least half were elderly men and women  there were also three or four children .  of the rest  more were women than men .  none showed any fear or uncertainty whatever .   trevize said in a low voice to bliss   are you manipulating them .  they seem serene .     i m not in the least manipulating them   said bliss .   i never touch minds unless i must .  it s fallom i m concerned with .    few as the newcomers were to anyone who had experienced the crowds of curiosity seekers on any normal world in the galaxy  they were a mob to fallom  to whom the three adults on the far star had been something to grow accustomed to .  fallom was breathing rapidly and shallowly  and her eyes were half closed .  almost  she seemed in shock .   bliss was stroking her  softly and rhythmically  and making soothing sounds .  trevize was certain that she was delicately accompanying it all by an infinitely gentle rearrangement of mental fibrils .   fallom took in a sudden deep breath  almost a gasp  and shook herself  in what was perhaps an involuntary shudder .  she raised her head and looked at those present with something approaching normality and then buried her head in the space between bliss s arm and body .   bliss let her remain so  while her arm  encircling fallom s shoulder  tightened periodically as though to indicate her own protective presence over and over .   pelorat seemed rather awestruck  as his eyes went from one alphan to another .  he said   golan  they differ so among themselves .    trevize had noticed that  too .  there were various shades of skin and hair color  including one brilliant redhead with blue eyes and freckled skin .  at least three apparent adults were as short as hiroko  and one or two were taller than trevize .  a number of both sexes had eyes resembling those of hiroko  and trevize remembered that on the teeming commercial planets of the fili sector  such eyes were characteristic of the population  but he had never visited that sector .   all the alphans wore nothing above the waist and among the women the breasts all seemed to be small .  that was the most nearly uniform of all the bodily characteristics that he could see .   bliss said suddenly   miss hiroko  my youngster is not accustomed to travel through space and she is absorbing more novelty than she can easily manage .  would it be possible for her to sit down and  perhaps  have something to eat and drink .    hiroko looked puzzled  and pelorat repeated what bliss had said in the more ornate galactic of the mid imperial period .   hiroko s hand then flew to her mouth and she sank to her knees gracefully .   i crave your pardon  respected madam   she said .   i have not thought of this child s needs  nor of thine .  the strangeness of this event has too occupied me .  wouldst thou would you all as visitors and guests  enter the refectory for morning meal .  may we join you and serve as hosts .    bliss said   that is kind of you .   she spoke slowly and pronounced the words carefully  hoping to make them easier to understand .   it would be better  though  if you alone served as hostess  for the sake of the comfort of the child who is unaccustomed to being with many people at once .    hiroko rose to her feet .   it shall be as thou hast said .    she led them  in leisurely manner  across the grass .  other alphans edged closer .  they seemed particularly interested in the clothing of the newcomers .  trevize removed his light jacket  and handed it to a man who had sidled toward him and had laid a questing finger upon it .    here   he said   look it over  but return it .   then he said to hiroko .   see that i get it back  miss hiroko .     of a surety  it will be backhanded  respected sir .   she nodded her head gravely .   trevize smiled and walked on .  he was more comfortable without the jacket in the light  mild breeze .   he had detected no visible weapons on the persons of any of those about him  and he found it interesting that no one seemed to show any fear or discomfort over trevize s .  they did not even show curiosity concerning them .  it might well be that they were not aware of the objects as weapons at all .  from what trevize had so far seen  alpha might well be a world utterly without violence .   a woman  having moved rapidly forward  so as to be a little ahead of bliss  turned to examine her blouse minutely  then said   hast thou breasts  respected madam .    and  as though unable to wait for an answer  she placed her hand lightly on bliss s chest .   bliss smiled and said   as thou hast discovered  i have .  they are perhaps not as shapely as thine  but i hide them not for that reason .  on my world  it is not fitting that they be uncovered .    she whispered in an aside to pelorat   how do you like the way i m getting the hang of classical galactic .     you did that very well  bliss   said pelorat .   the dining room was a large one with long tables to which were attached long benches on either side .  clearly  the alphans ate community fashion .   trevize felt a pang of conscience .  bliss s request for privacy had reserved this space for five people and forced the alphans generally to remain in exile outside .  a number  however  placed themselves at a respectful distance from the windows  which were no more than gaps in the wall  unfilled even by screens   presumably so that they might watch the strangers eat .   involuntarily  he wondered what would happen if it were to rain .  surely  the rain would come only when it was needed  light and mild  continuing without significant wind till enough had fallen .  moreover  it would always come at known times so that the alphans would be ready for it  trevize imagined .   the window he was facing looked out to sea  and far out at the horizon it seemed to trevize that he could make out a bank of clouds similar to those that so nearly filled the skies everywhere but over this little spot of eden .   there were advantages to weather control .   eventually  they were served by a young woman on tiptoeing feet .  they were not asked for their choice  but were merely served .  there was a small glass of milk  a larger of grape juice  a still larger of water .  each diner received two large poached eggs  with slivers of white cheese on the side .  each also had a large platter of broiled fish and small roasted potatoes  resting on cool  green lettuce leaves .   bliss looked with dismay at the quantity of food before her and was clearly at a loss where to begin .  fallom had no such trouble .  she drank the grape juice thirstily and with clear evidence of approval  then chewed away at the fish and potatoes .  she was about to use her fingers for the purpose  but bliss held up a large spoon with tined ends that could serve as a fork as well  and fallom accepted it .   pelorat smiled his satisfaction and cut into the eggs at once .   trevize  saying   now to be reminded what real eggs taste like   followed suit .   hiroko  forgetting to eat her own breakfast in her delight at the manner in which the others ate  for even bliss finally began  with obvious relish   said  at last   is it well .     it is well   said trevize  his voice somewhat muffled .   this island has no shortage of food  apparently .   or do you serve us more than you should  out of politeness .    hiroko listened with intent eyes  and seemed to grasp the meaning  for she said   no  no  respected sir .  our land is bountiful  our sea even more so .  our ducks give eggs  our goats both cheese and milk .  and there are our grains .  above all  our sea is filled with countless varieties of fish in numberless quantity .  the whole empire could eat at our tables and consume not the fish of our sea .    trevize smiled discreetly .  clearly  the young alphan had not the smallest idea of the true size of the galaxy .   he said   you call this island new earth  hiroko .  where  then  might old earth be .    she looked at him in bewilderment .   old earth  say you .  i crave pardon  respected sir .  i take not thy meaning .    trevize said   before there was a new earth  your people must have lived elsewhere .  where was this elsewhere from which they came .     i know naught of that  respected sir   she said  with troubled gravity .   this land has been mine all my life  and my mother s and grandmother s before me  and  i doubt not  their grandmother s and great grandmother s before them .  of any other land  i know naught .     but   said trevize  descending to gentle argumentation   you speak of this land as new earth .  why do you call it that .     because  respected sir   she replied  equally gentle   that is what it is called by all since the mind of woman goeth not to the contrary .     but it is new earth  and therefore  a later earth .  there must be an old earth  a former one  for which it was named .  each morning there is a new day  and that implies that earlier there had existed an old day .  don t you see that this must be so .     nay  respected sir .  i know only what this land is called .  i know of naught else  nor do i follow this reasoning of thine which sounds very much like what we call here chop logic .  i mean no offense .    and trevize shook his head and felt defeated .      .   trevize leaned toward pelorat  and whispered   wherever we go  whatever we do  we get no information .     we know where earth is  so what does it matter .   said pelorat  doing little more than move his lips .    i want to know something about it .     she s very young .  scarcely a repository of information .    trevize thought about that  then nodded .   right  janov .    he turned to hiroko and said   miss hiroko  you haven t asked us why we are here in your land .    hiroko s eyes fell  and she said   that would be but scant courtesy until you have all eaten and rested  respected sir .     but we have eaten  or almost so  and we have recently rested  so i shall tell you why we are here .  my friend  dr .  pelorat  is a scholar on our world  a learned man .  he is a mythologist .  do you know what that means .     nay  respected sir  i do not .     he studies old tales as they are told on different worlds .  old tales are known as myths or legends and they interest dr .  pelorat .  are there learned ones on new earth who know the old tales of this world .    hiroko s forehead creased slightly into a frown of thought .  she said   this is not a matter in which i am myself skilled .  we have an old man in these parts who loves to talk of ancient days .  where he may have learned these things  i know not  and methinks he may have spun his notions out of air  or heard them from others who did so spin .  this is perhaps the material which thy learned companion would hear  yet i would not mislead thee .  it is in my mind   she looked to right and left as though unwilling to be overheard   that the old man is but a prater  though many listen willingly to him .    trevize nodded .   such prating is what we wish .  would it be possible for you to take my friend to this old man     monolee he calls himself .      to monolee  then .  and do you think monolee would be willing to speak to my friend .     he .  willing to speak .   said hiroko scornfully .   thou must ask  rather  if he be ever ready to cease from speaking .  he is but a man  and will therefore speak  if allowed  till a fortnight hence  with no pause .  i mean no offense  respected sir .     no offense taken .  would you lead my friend to monolee now .     that may anyone do at any time .  the ancient is ever home and ever ready to greet an ear .    trevize said   and perhaps an older woman would be willing to come and sit with madam bliss .  she has the child to care for and cannot move about too much .  it would please her to have company  for women  as you know  are fond of     prating .   said hiroko  clearly amused .   why  so men say  although i have observed that men are always the greater babblers .  let the men return from their fishing  and one will vie with another in telling greater flights of fancy concerning their catches .  none will mark them nor believe  but this will not stop them  either .  but enough of my prating  too .   i will have a friend of my mother s  one whom i can see through the window  stay with madam bliss and the child  and before that she will guide your friend  the respected doctor  to the aged monolee .  if your friend will hear as avidly as monolee will prate  thou wilt scarcely part them in this life .  wilt thou pardon my absence a moment .    when she had left  trevize turned to pelorat and said   listen  get what you can out of the old man  and bliss  you find out what you can from whoever stays with you .  what you want is anything about earth .     and you .   said bliss .   what will you do .     i will remain with hiroko  and try to find a third source .    bliss smiled .   ah yes .  pel will be with this old man  i with an old woman .  you will force yourself to remain with this fetchingly unclad young woman .  it seems a reasonable division of labor .     as it happens  bliss  it is reasonable .     but you don t find it depressing that the reasonable division of labor should work out so  i suppose .     no  i don t .  why should i .     why should you  indeed .    hiroko was back  and sat down again .   it is all arranged .  the respected dr .  pelorat will be taken to monolee  and the respected madam bliss  together with her child  will have company .  may i be granted  then  respected sir trevize  the boon of further conversation with thee  mayhap of this old earth of which thou     pratest .   asked trevize .    nay   said hiroko  laughing .   but thou dost well to mock me .  i showed thee but discourtesy ere now in answering thy question on this matter .  i would fain make amends .    trevize turned to pelorat .   fain .     be eager   said pelorat softly .   trevize said   miss hiroko  i felt no discourtesy  but if it will make you feel better  i will gladly speak with you .     kindly spoken .  i thank thee   said hiroko  rising .   trevize rose  too .   bliss   he said   make sure janov remains safe .     leave that to me .  as for you  you have your   she nodded toward his holsters .    i don t think i ll need them   said trevize uncomfortably .   he followed hiroko out of the dining room .  the sun was higher in the sky now and the temperature was still warmer .  there was an otherworldly smell as always .  trevize remembered it had been faint on comporellon  a little musty on aurora  and rather delightful on solaria .   on melpomenia  they were in space suits where one is only aware of the smell of one s own body .   in every case  it disappeared in a matter of hours as the osmic centers of the nose grew saturated .   here  on alpha  the odor was a pleasant grassy fragrance under the warming effect of the sun  and trevize felt a bit annoyed  knowing that this  too  would soon disappear .   they were approaching a small structure that seemed to be built of a pale pink plaster .    this   said hiroko   is my home .  it used to belong to my mother s younger sister .    she walked in and motioned trevize to follow .  the door was open or  trevize noticed as he passed through  it would be more accurate to say there was no door .   trevize said   what do you do when it rains .     we are ready .  it will rain two days hence  for three hours ere dawn  when it is coolest  and when it will moisten the soil most powerfully .  then i have but to draw this curtain  both heavy and water repellent  across the door .    she did so as she spoke .  it seemed made of a strong canvas like material .    i will leave it in place now   she went on .   all will then know i am within but not available  for i sleep or am occupied in matters of importance .     it doesn t seem much of a guardian of privacy .     why should it not be .  see  the entrance is covered .     but anyone could shove it aside .     with disregard of the wishes of the occupant .   hiroko looked shocked .   are such things done on thy world .  it would be barbarous .    trevize grinned .   i only asked .    she led him into the second of two rooms  and  at her invitation  he seated himself in a padded chair .  there was something claustrophobic about the blockish smallness and emptiness of the rooms  but the house seemed designed for little more than seclusion and rest .  the window openings were small and near the ceiling  but there were dull mirror strips in a careful pattern along the walls  which reflected light diffusely .  there were slits in the ioor from which a gentle  cool breeze uplifted .  trevize saw no signs of artifinal lighting and wondered if alphans had to wake at sunrise and go to bed at sunset .   he was about to ask  but hiroko spoke first  saying   is madam bliss thy woman companion .    trevize said cautiously   do you mean by that  is she my sexual partner .    hiroko colored .   i pray thee  have regard for the decencies of polite conversation  but i do mean private pleasantry .     no  she is the woman companion of my learned friend .     but thou art the younger  and the more goodly .     well  thank you for your opinion  but it is not bliss s opinion .  she likes dr .  pelorat much more than she does me .     that much surprises me .  will he not share .     i have not asked him whether he would  but i m sure he wouldn t .  nor would i want him to .    hiroko nodded her head wisely .   i know .  it is her fundament .     her fundament .     thou knowest .  this .   and she slapped her own dainty rear end .    oh  that .  i understand you .  yes  bliss is generously proportioned in her pelvic anatomy .   he made a curving gesture with his hands and winked .   and hiroko laughed .    trevize said   nevertheless  a great many men enjoy that kind of generosity of figure .     i cannot believe so .  surely it would be a sort of gluttony to wish excess of that which is pleasant in moderation .  wouldst thou think more of me if my breasts were massive and dangling  with nipples pointing to toes .  i have  in good sooth  seen such  yet have i not seen men flock to them .  the poor women so afflicted must needs cover their monstrosities as madam bliss does .     such oversize wouldn t attract me  either  though i am sure that bliss doesn t cover her breasts for any imperfection they may have .     thou dost not  then  disapprove of my visage or form .     i would be a madman to do so .  you are beautiful .     and what dost thou for pleasantries on this ship of thine  as thou flittest from one world to the next madam bliss being denied thee .     nothing  hiroko .  there s nothing to do .  i think of pleasantries on occasion and that has its discomforts  but we who travel through space know well that there are times when we must do without .  we make up for it at other times .     if it be a discomfort  how may that be removed .     i experience considerably more discomfort since you ve brought up the subject .  i don t think it would be polite to suggest how i might be comforted .     would it be discourtesy  were i to suggest a way .     it would depend entirely on the nature of the suggestion .     i would suggest that we be pleasant with each other .     did you bring me here  hiroko  that it might come to this .    hiroko said  with a pleased smile   yes .  it would be both my hostess duty of courtesy  and it would be my wish  too .     if that s the case  i will admit it is my wish  too .  in fact  i would like very much to oblige you in this .  i would be uh fain to do thee pleasure .      chapter       the music festival       .     lunch was in the same dining room in which they had had breakfast .  it was full of alphans  and with them were trevize and pelorat  made thoroughly welcome .  bliss and fallom ate separately  and more or less privately  in a small annex .   there were several varieties of fish  together with soup in which there were strips of what might well have been boiled kid .  loaves of bread were there for the slicing  butter and jam for the spreading .  a salad  large and diffuse  came afterward  and there was a notable absence of any dessert  although fruit juices were passed about in apparently inexhaustible pitchers .  both foundationers were forced to be abstemious after their heavy breakfast  but everyone else seemed to eat freely .    how do they keep from getting fat .   wondered pelorat in a low voice .   trevize shrugged .   lots of physical labor  perhaps .    it was clearly a society in which decorum at meals was not greatly valued .  there was a miscellaneous hubbub of shouting  laughing  and thumping on the table with thick  obviously unbreakable  cups .  women were as loud and raucous as men  albeit in higher pitch .   pelorat winced  but trevize  who now  temporarily  at least  felt no trace of the discomfort he had spoken of to hiroko  felt both relaxed and good natured .   he said   actually  it has its pleasant side .  these are people who appear to enjoy life and who have few  if any  cares .  weather is what they make it and food is unimaginably plentiful .  this is a golden age for them that simply continues and continues .    he had to shout to make himself heard  and pelorat shouted back   but it s so noisy .     they re used to it .     i don t see how they can understand each other in this riot .    certainly  it was all lost on the two foundationers .  the queer pronunciation and the archaic grammar and word order of the alphan language made it impossible to understand at the intense sound levels .  to the foundationers  it was like listening to the sounds of a zoo in fright .   it was not till after lunch that they rejoined bliss in a small structure  which trevize found to be rather inconsiderably different from hiroko s quarters  and which had been assigned them as their own temporary living quarters .  fallom was in the second room  enormously relieved to be alone  according to bliss  and attempting to nap .   pelorat looked at the door gap in the wall and said uncertainly   there s very little privacy here .  how can we speak freely .     i assure you   said trevize   that once we pull the canvas barrier across the door  we won t be disturbed .  the canvas makes it impenetrable by all the force of social custom .    pelorat glanced at the high  open windows .   we can be overheard .     we need not shout .  the alphans won t eavesdrop .  even when they stood outside the windows of the dining room at breakfast  they remained at a respectful distance .    bliss smiled .   you ve learned so much about alphan customs in the time you spent alone with gentle little hiroko  and you ve gained such confidence in their respect for privacy .  what happened .    trevize said   if you re aware that the tendrils of my mind have undergone a change for the better and can guess the reason  i can only ask you to leave my mind alone .     you know very well that gaia will not touch your mind under any circumstances short of life crisis  and you know why .  still  i m not mentally blind .  i could sense what happened a kilometer away .  is this your invariable custom on space voyages  my erotomaniac friend .     erotomaniac .  come  bliss .  twice on this entire trip .  twice .     we were only on two worlds that had functioning human females on them .  two out of two  and we had only been a few hours on each .     you are well aware i had no choice on comporellon .     that makes sense .  i remember what she looked like .   for a few moments  bliss dissolved in laughter .  then she said   yet i don t think hiroko held you helpless in her mighty grip  or inflicted her irresistible will on your cringing body .     of course not .  i was perfectly willing .  but it was her suggestion  just the same .    pelorat said  with just a tinge of envy in his voice   does this happen to you all the time  golan .     of course it must  pel   said bliss .   women are helplessly drawn to him .     i wish that were so   said trevize   but it isn t .  and i m glad it isn t i do have other things i want to do in life .  just the same  in this case i was irresistible .  after all   we were the first people from another world that hiroko had ever seen or  apparently  that anyone now alive on alpha had ever seen  i gathered from things she let slip  casual remarks  that she had the rather exciting notion that i might be different from alphans  either anatomically or in my technique .  poor thing .  i m  afraid she was disappointed .     oh .   said bliss .   were you .     no   said trevize .   i have been on a number of worlds and i have had my experiences .  and what i had discovered is that people are people and sex is sex  wherever one goes .  if there are noticeable differences  they are usually both trivial and unpleasant .  the perfumes i ve encountered in my time .  i remember when a young woman simply couldn t manage unless there was music loudly played  music that consisted of a desperate screeching sound .  so she played the music and then i couldn t manage .  i assure you if it s the same old thing  then i m satisfied .     speaking of music   said bliss   we are invited to a musicale after dinner .  a very formal thing  apparently  that is being held in our honor .  i gather the alphans are very proud of their music .    trevize grimaced .   their pride will in no way make the music sound better to our ears .     hear me out   said bliss .   i gather that their pride is that they play expertly on very archaic instruments .  very archaic .  we may get some information about earth by way of them .    trevize s eyebrows shot up .   an interesting thought .  and that reminds me that both of you may already have information .  janov  did you see this monolee that hiroko told us about .     indeed i did   said pelorat .   i was with him for three hours and hiroko did not exaggerate .  it was a virtual monologue on his part and when i left to come to lunch  he clung to me and would not let me go until i promised to return whenever i could in order that i might listen to him some more .     and did he say anything of interest .     well  he  too like everybody else insisted that earth was thoroughly and murderously radioactive  that the ancestors of the alphans were the last to leave and that if they hadn t  they would have died .   and  golan  he was so emphatic that i couldn t help believing him .  i m convinced that earth is dead  and that our entire search is  after all  useless .       .   trevize sat back in his chair  staring at pelorat  who was sitting on a narrow cot .  bliss  having risen from where she had been sitting next to pelorat  looked from one to the other .   finally  trevize said   let me be the judge as to whether our search is useless or not  janov .  tell me what the garrulous old man had to say to you in brief  of course .    pelorat said   i took notes as monolee spoke .  it helped reinforce my role a scholar  but i don t have to refer to them .  he was quite stream of consciousness in his speaking .  each thing he said would remind him of something else  but  of course  i have spent my life trying to organize information in the search of the relevant and significant  so that it s second nature for me now to be able to condense a long and incoherent discourse    trevize said gently   into something just as long and incoherent .  to the point  dear janov .    pelorat cleared his throat uneasily .   yes  certainly  old chap .  i    try to make a connected and chronological tale out of it .  earth was the original home of humanity and of millions of species of plants and animals .  it continued so for countless years until hyperspatial travel was invented .  then the spacer worlds were founded .  they broke away from earth  developed their own cultures  and came to despise and oppress the mother planet .    after a couple of centuries of this  earth managed to regain its freedom  though monolee did not explain the exact manner in which this was done  and i dared not ask questions  even if he had given me a chance to interrupt  which he did not  for that might merely have sent him into new byways .  he did mention a culture hero named elijah baley  but the references were so characteristic of the habit of attributing to one figure the accomplishments of generations that there was little value in attempting to    bliss said   yes  pel dear  we understand that part .    again  pelorat paused in midstream and reconsidered .   of course .  my apologies .  earth initiated a second wave of settlements  founding many new worlds in a new fashion .  the new group of settlers proved more vigorous than the spacers  outpaced them  defeated them  outlasted them  and  eventually  established the galactic empire .  during the course of the wars between the settlers and the spacers no  not wars  for he used the word  conflict   being very careful about that the earth became radioactive .    trevize said  with clear annoyance   that s ridiculous  janov .  how can a world become radioactive .  every world is very slightly radioactive to one degree or another from the moment of formation  and that radioactivity slowly decays .  it doesn t become radioactive .    pelorat shrugged .   i m only telling you what he said .  and he was only telling me what he had heard from someone who only told him what he had heard and so on .  it s folk history  told and retold over the generations  with who knows what distortions creeping in at each retelling .     i understand that  but are there no books  documents  ancient histories which have frozen the story at an early time and which could give us something more accurate than the present tale .     actually  i managed to ask that question  and the answer is no .  he said vaguely that there were books about it in ancient times and that they had long ago been lost  but that what he was telling us was what had been in those books .     yes  well distorted .  it s the same story .  in every world we go to  the records of earth have  in one way or another  disappeared .   well  how did he say the radioactivity began on earth .     he didn t  in any detail .  the closest he came to saying so was that the spacers were responsible  but then i gathered that the spacers were the demons on whom the people of earth blamed all misfortune .  the radioactivity    a clear voice overrode him here .   bliss  am i a spacer .    fallom was standing in the narrow doorway between the two rooms  hair tousled and the nightgown she was wearing  designed to fit bliss s more ample proportions  having slid off one shoulder to reveal an undeveloped breast .   bliss said   we worry about eavesdroppers outside and we forget the one inside .   now  fallom  why do you say that .   she rose and walked toward the youngster .   fallom said   i don t have what they have   she pointed at the two men   or what you have  bliss .  i m different .  is that because i m a spacer .     you are  fallom   said bliss soothingly   but little differences don t matter .  come back to bed .    fallom became submissive as she always did when bliss willed her to be so .  she turned and said   am i a demon .  what is a demon .    bliss said over her shoulder   wait one moment for me .  i ll be right back .    she was  within five minutes .  she was shaking her head .   she ll be sleeping now till i wake her .  i should have done that before  i suppose  but any modification of the mind must be the result of necessity .   she added defensively   i can t have her brood on the differences between her genital equipment and ours .    pelorat said   someday she ll have to know she s hermaphroditic .     someday   said bliss   but not now .  go on with the story  pel .     yes   said trevize   before something else interrupts us .     well  earth became radioactive  or at least its crust did .  at that time  earth had had an enormous population that was centered in huge cities that existed for the most part underground     now  that   put in trevize   is surely not so .   it must be local patriotism glorifying the golden age of a planet  and the details were simply a distortion of trantor in its golden age  when it was the imperial capital of a galaxy wide system of worlds .    pelorat paused  then said   really  golan  you mustn t teach me my business .  we mythologists know very well that myths and legends contain borrowings  moral lessons  nature cycles  and a hundred other distorting influences  and we labor to cut them away and get to what might be a kernel of truth .  in fact  these same techniques must be applied to the most sober histories  for no one writes the clear and apparent truth if such a thing can even be said to exist .  for now  i m telling you more or less what monolee told me  though i suppose i am adding distortions of my own  try as i might not to do so .     well  well   said trevize .   go on  janov .  i meant no offense .     and i ve taken none .  the huge cities  assuming they existed  crumbled and shrank as the radioactivity slowly grew more intense until the population was but a remnant of what it had been  clinging precariously to regions that were relatively radiation free .  the population was kept down by rigid birth control and by the euthanasia of people over sixty .     horrible   said bliss indignantly .    undoubtedly   said pelorat   but that is what they did  according to monolee  and that might be true  for it is certainly not complimentary to the earthpeople and it is not likely that an uncomplimentary lie would be made up .  the earthpeople  having been despised and oppressed by the spacers  were now despised and oppressed by the empire  though here we may have exaggeration there out of self pity  which is a very seductive emotion .  there is the case     yes  yes  pelorat  another time .  please go on with earth .     i beg your pardon .  the empire  in a fit of benevolence  agreed to substitute imported radiation free soil and to cart away the contaminated soil .  needless to say  that was an enormous task which the empire soon tired of  especially as this period  if my guess is right  coincided with the fall of kandar v  after which the empire had many more things to worry about than earth .    the radioactivity continued to grow more intense  the population continued to fall  and finally the empire  in another fit of benevolence  offered to transplant the remnant of the population to a new world of their own to this world  in short .    at an earlier period  it seems an expedition had stocked the ocean so that by the time  the plans for the transplantation of earthpeople were being developed  there was a full oxygen atmosphere and an ample supply of food on alpha .  nor did any of the worlds of the galactic empire covet this world because there is a certain natural antipathy to planets that circle stars of a binary system .  there are so few suitable planets in such a system  i suppose  that even suitable ones are rejected because of the assumption that there must be something wrong with them .  this is a common thought fashion .  there is the well known case  for instance  of     later with the well known case  janov   said trevize .   on with the transplantation .     what remained   said pelorat  hurrying his words a little   was to prepare a land base .  the shallowest part of the ocean was found and sediment was raised from deeper parts to add to the shallow sea bottom and  finally  to produce the island of new earth .  boulders and coral were dredged up and added to the island .  land plants were seeded so that root systems might help make the new land firm .  again  the empire had set itself an enormous task .  perhaps continents were planned at first  but by the time this one island was produced  the empire s moment of benevolence had passed .    what was left of earth s population was brought here .  the empire s fleets carried off its men and machinery  and they never returned .  the earthpeople  living on new earth  found themselves in complete isolation .    trevize said   complete .  did monolee say that no one from elsewhere in the galaxy has ever come here till we did .     almost complete   said pelorat .   there is nothing to come here for  i suppose  even if we set aside the superstitious distaste for binary systems .  occasionally  at long intervals  a ship would come  as ours did  but it would eventually leave and there has never been a follow up .  and that s it .    trevize said   did you ask monolee where earth was located .     of course i asked that .  he didn t know .     how can he know so much about earth s history without knowing where it is located .     i asked him specifically  golan  if the star that was only a parsec or so distant from alpha might be the sun about which earth revolved .  he didn t know what a parsec was  and i said it was a short distance  astronomically speaking .  he said  short or long  he did not know where earth was located and he didn t know anyone who knew  and  in his opinion  it was wrong to try to find it .  it should be allowed  he said  to move endlessly through space in peace .    trevize said   do you agree with him .    pelorat shook his head sorrowfully .   not really .  but he said that at the rate the radioactivity continued to increase  the planet must have become totally uninhabitable not long after the transplantation took place and that by now it must be burning intensely so that no one can approach .     nonsense   said trevize firmly .   a planet cannot become radioactive and  having done so  continuously increase in radioactivity .  radioactivity can only decrease .     but monolee is so sure of it .  so many people we ve talked to on various worlds unite in this that earth is radioactive .  surely  it is useless to go on .       .   trevize drew a deep breath  then said  in a carefully controlled voice   nonsense  janov .  that s not true .    pelorat said   well  now  old chap  you mustn t believe something just because you want to believe it .     my wants have nothing to do with it .  in world after world we find all records of earth wiped out .  why should they be .  wiped out if there is nothing to hide  if earth is a dead  radioactive world that cannot be approached .     i don t know  golan .     yes  you do .  when we were approaching melpomenia  you said that the radioactivity might be the other side of the coin .  destroy records to remove accurate information  supply the tale of radioactivity to insert inaccurate information .  both would discourage any attempt to find earth  and we mustn t be deluded into discouragement .    bliss said   actually  you seem to think the nearby star is earth s sun .  why  then  continue to argue the question of radioactivity .  what does it matter .  why not simply go to the nearby star and see if it is earth  and  if so  what it is like .    trevize said   because those on earth must be  in their way  extraordinarily powerful  and i would prefer to approach with some knowledge of the world and its inhabitants .  as it is  since i continue to remain ignorant of earth  approaching it is dangerous .  it is my notion that i leave the rest of you here on alpha and that i proceed to earth by myself .  one life is quite enough to risk .     no  golan   said pelorat earnestly .   bliss and the child might wait here  but i must go with you .  i have been searching for earth since before you were born and i cannot stay behind when the goal is so close  whatever dangers might threaten .     bliss and the child will not wait here   said bliss .   i am gaia  and gaia can protect us even against earth .     i hope you re right   said trevize gloomily   but gaia could not prevent the elimination of all early memories of earth s role in its founding .     that was done in gaia s early history when it was not yet well organized  not yet advanced .  matters are different now .     i hope that is so .   or is it that you have gained information about earth this morning that we don t have .  i did ask that you speak to some of the older women that might be available here .     and so i did .    trevize said   and what did you find out .     nothing about earth .  there is a total blank there .     ah .     but they are advanced biotechnologists .       oh .     on this small island  they have grown and tested innumerable strains of plants and animals and designed a suitable ecological balance  stable and self .  supporting  despite the few species with which they began .  they have improved on the ocean life that they found when they arrived here a few thousand years ago  increasing their nutritive value and improving their taste .  it is their biotechnology that has made this world such a cornucopia of plenty .  they have plans for themselves  too .     what kind of plans .    bliss said   they know perfectly well they cannot reasonably expect to expand their range under present circumstances  confined as they are to the one small patch of land that exists on their world  but they dream of becoming amphibious .     of becoming what .     amphibious .  they plan to develop gills in addition to lungs .  they dream of being able to spend substantial periods of time underwater  of finding shallow regions and building structures on the ocean bottom .  my informant was quite glowing about it but she admitted that this had been a goal of the alphans for some centuries now and that little  if any  progress has been made .    trevize said   that s two fields in which they might be more advanced than we are  weather control and biotechnology .  i wonder what their techniques are .     we d have to find specialists   said bliss   and they might not be willing to talk about it .    trevize said   it s not our primary concern here  but it would clearly pay the foundation to attempt to learn from this miniature world .    pelorat said   we manage to control the weather fairly well on terminus  as it is .     control is good on many worlds   said trevize   but always it s a matter of the world as a whole .  here the alphans control the weather of a small portion of the world and they must have techniques we don t have .   anything else  bliss .     social invitations .  these appear to be a holiday making people  in whatever time they can take from farming and fishing .  after dinner  tonight there ll be a music festival .  i told you about that already .  tomorrow  during the day  there will be a beach festival .  apparently  all around the rim of the island there will be a congregation of everyone who can get away from the fields in order that they might enjoy the water and celebrate the sun  since it will be raining the next day .  in the morning  the fishing fleet will come back  beating the rain  and by evening there will be a food festival  sampling the catch .    pelorat groaned .   the meals are ample enough as it is .  what would a food festival be like .     i gather that it will feature not quantity  but variety .  in any case  all four of us are invited to participate in all the festivals  especially the music festival tonight .     on the antique instruments .   asked trevize .    that s right .     what makes them antique  by the way .  primitive computers .     no  no .  that s the point .  it isn t electronic music at all  but mechanical .  they described it to me .  they scrape strings  blow in tubes  and bang on surfaces .     i hope you re making that up   said trevize  appalled .    no  i m not .  and i understand that your hiroko will be blowing on one of the tubes i forget its name and you ought to be able to endure that .     as for myself   said pelorat   i would love to go .  i know very little about primitive music and i would like to hear it .     she is not  my hiroko     said trevize coldly .   but are the instruments of the type once used on earth  do you suppose .     so i gathered   said bliss .   at least the alphan women said they were designed long before their ancestors came here .     in that case   said trevize   it may be worth listening to all that scraping  tootling  and banging  for whatever information it might conceivably yield concerning earth .       .   oddly enough  it was fallom who was most excited at the prospect of a musical evening .  she and bliss had bathed in the small outhouse behind their quarters .  it had a bath with running water  hot and cold  or  rather  warm and cool   a washbowl  and a commode .  it was totally clean and usable and  in the late afternoon sun  it was even well lit and cheerful .   as always  fallom was fascinated with bliss s breasts and bliss was reduced to saying  now that fallom understood galactic  that on her world that was the way people were .  to which fallom said  inevitably   why .   and bliss  after some thought  deciding there was no sensible way of answering  returned the universal reply   because .    when they were done  bliss helped fallom put on the undergarment supplied them by the alphans and worked out the system whereby the skirt went on over it .  leaving fallom unclothed from the waist up seemed reasonable enough .  she herself  while making use of alphan garments below the waist  rather tight about the hips   put on her own blouse .  it seemed silly to be too inhibited to expose breasts in a society where all women did  especially since her own were not large and were as shapely as any she had seen but there it was .   the two men took their turn at the outhouse next  trevize muttering the usual male complaint concerning the time the women had taken .   bliss turned fallom about to make sure the skirt would hold in place over her boyish hips and buttocks .  she said   it s a very pretty skirt  fallom .  do you like it .    fallom stared at it in a mirror and said   yes  i do .  won t i be cold with nothing on  though .   and she ran her hands down her bare chest .    i don t think so  fallom .  it s quite warm on this world .     you have something on .     yes  i do .  that s how it is on my world .  now  fallom  we re going to be with a great many alphans during dinner and afterward .  do you think you can bear that .    fallom looked distressed  and bliss went on   i will sit on your right side and i will hold you .  pel will sit on the other side  and trevize will sit across the table from you .  we won t let anyone talk to you  and you won t have to talk to anyone .     i ll try  bliss   fallom piped in her highest tones .    then afterward   said bliss   some alphans will make music for us in their own special way .  do you know what music is .   she hummed in the best imitation of electronic harmony that she could .   fallom s face lit up .   you mean   the last word was in her own  language  and she burst into song .   bliss s eyes widened .  it was a beautiful tune  even though it was wild  and rich in trills .   that s right .  music   she said .   fallom said excitedly   jemby made  she hesitated  then decided to use the galactic word  music all the time .  it made music on a   again a word in her own language .   bliss repeated the word doubtfully   on a feeful .    fallom laughed .   not feeful     with both words juxtaposed like that  bliss could hear the difference  but she despaired of reproducing the second .  she said   what does it look like .    fallom s as yet limited vocabulary in galactic did not suffice for an accurate description  and her gestures did not produce any shape clearly in bliss s mind .    he showed me how to use the   fallom said proudly .   i used my  fingers just the way jemby did  but it said that soon i wouldn t have to .     that s wonderful  dear   said bliss .   after dinner  we ll see if the alphans are as good as your jemby was .    fallom s eyes sparkled and pleasant thoughts of what was to follow carried her through a lavish dinner despite the crowds and laughter and noise all about her .  only once  when a dish was accidentally upset  setting off shrieks of excitement fairly close to them  did fallom look frightened  and bliss promptly held her close in a warm and protective hug .    i wonder if we can arrange to eat by ourselves   she muttered to pelorat .   otherwise  we ll have to get off this world .  it s bad enough eating all this isolate animal protein  but i must be able to do it in peace .     it s only high spirits   said pelorat  who would have endured anything within reason that he felt came under the heading of primitive behavior and beliefs .    and then the dinner was over  and the announcement came that the music festival would soon begin .      .   the hall in which the music festival was to be held was about as large as the dining room  and there were folding seats  rather uncomfortable  trevize found out  for about a hundred fifty people .  as honored guests  the visitors were led to the front row  and various alphans commented politely and favorably on their clothes .   both men were bare above the waist and trevize tightened his abdominal muscles whenever he thought of it and stared down  on occasion  with complacent self admiration at his dark haired chest .  pelorat  in his ardent observation of everything about him  was indifferent to his own appearance .  bliss s blouse drew covert stares of puzzlement but nothing was said concerning it .   trevize noted that the hall was only about half full and that the large majority of the audience were women  since  presumably  so many men were out to sea .   pelorat nudged trevize and whispered   they have electricity .    trevize looked at the vertical tubes on the walls  and at others on the ceiling .  they were softly luminous .    fluorescence   he said .   quite primitive .     yes  but they do the job  and we ve got those things in our rooms and in the outhouse .  i thought they were just decorative .  if we can find out how to work them  we won t have to stay in the dark .    bliss said irritably   they might have told us .    pelorat said   they thought we d know  that anyone would know .    four women now emerged from behind screens and seated themselves in a group in the space at the front .  each held an instrument of varnished wood of a similar shape  but one that was not easily describable .  the instruments were chiefly different in size .  one was quite small  two somewhat larger  and the fourth considerably larger .  each woman also held a long rod in the other hand .   the audience whistled softly as they came in  in response to which the four women bowed .  each had a strip of gauze bound fairly tightly across the breasts as though to keep them from interfering with the instrument .   trevize  interpreting the whistles as signs of approval  or of pleased anticipation  felt it only polite to add his own .  at that  fallom added a trill that was far more than a whistle and that was beginning to attract attention when pressure from bliss s hand stopped her .   three of the women  without preparation  put their instruments under their chins  while the largest of the instruments remained between the legs of the fourth woman and rested on the floor .  the long rod in the right hand of each was sawed across the strings stretching nearly the length of the instrument  while the fingers of the left hand shifted rapidly along the upper ends of those strings .   this  thought trevize  was the  scraping  he had expected  but it didn t sound like scraping at all .  there was a soft and melodious succession of notes  each instrument doing something of its own and the whole fusing pleasantly .   it lacked the infinite complexity of electronic music   real music   as trevize could not help but think of it  and there was a distinct sameness to it .  still  as time passed  and his ear grew accustomed to this odd system of sound  he began to pick out subtleties .  it was wearisome to have to do so  and he thought  longingly  of the clamor and mathematical precision and purity of the real thing  but it occurred to him that if he listened to the music of these simple wooden devices long enough he might well grow to like it .   it was not till the concert was some forty five minutes old that hiroko stepped out .  she noticed trevize in the front row at once and smiled at him .  he joined the audience in the soft whistle of approval with a whole heart .  she looked beautiful in a long and most elaborate skirt  a large flower in her hair  and nothing at all over her breasts since  apparently  there was no danger of their interference with the instrument .   her instrument proved to be a dark wooden tube about two thirds of a meter long and nearly two centimeters thick .  she lifted the instrument to her lips and blew across an opening near one end  producing a thin  sweet note that wavered in pitch as her fingers manipulated metal objects along the length of the tube .   at the first sound  fallom clutched at bliss s arm and said   bliss  that s a   and the word sounded like  feeful  to bliss .   bliss shook her head firmly at fallom  who said  in a lower voice   but it is .    others were looking in fallom s direction .  bliss put her hand firmly over fallom s mouth  and leaned down to mutter an almost subliminally forceful  quiet .   into her ear .   fallom listened to hiroko s playing quietly thereafter  but her fingers moved spasmodically  as though they were operating the objects along the length of the instrument .   the final player in the concert was an elderly man who had an instrument with fluted sides suspended over his shoulders .  he pulled it in and out while one hand flashed across a succession of white and dark objects at one end  pressing them down in groups .   trevize found this sound particularly wearing  rather barbaric  and unpleasantly like the memory of the barking of the dogs on aurora not that the sound was like barking  but the emotions it gave rise to were similar .  bliss looked as though she would like to place her hands over her ears  and pelorat had a frown on his face .  only fallom seemed to enjoy it  for she was tapping her foot lightly  and trevize  when he noticed that  realized  to his own surprise  that there was a beat to the music that matched fallom s footfall .   it came to an end at last and there was a perfect storm of whistling  with fallom s trill clearly heard above it all .   then the audience broke up into small conversational groups and became as loud and raucous as alphans seemed to be on all public occasions .  the various individuals who had played in the concert stood about in front of the room and spoke to those people who came up to congratulate them .   fallom evaded bliss s grasp and ran up to hiroko .    hiroko   she cried out  gaspingly .   let me see the     the what  dear one .   said hiroko .    the thing you made the music with .     oh .   hiroko laughed .   that s a flute  little one .     may i see it .     well .   hiroko opened a case and took out the instrument .  it was in three parts  but she put it together quickly  held it toward fallom with the mouthpiece near her lips  and said   there  blow thou thy breath across this .     i know .  i know   said fallom eagerly  and reached for the flute .   automatically  hiroko snatched it away and held it high .   blow  child  but touch not .    fallom seemed disappointed .   may i just look at it  then .  i won t touch it .     certainly  dear one .    she held out the flute again and fallom stared at it earnestly .   and then  the fluorescent lighting in the room dimmed very slightly  and the sound of a flute s note  a little uncertain and wavering  made itself heard .   hiroko  in surprise  nearly dropped the flute  and fallom cried out   i did it .  i did it .  jemby said someday i could do it .    hiroko said   was it thou that made the sound .     yes  i did .  i did .     but how didst thou do so  child .    bliss said  red with embarrassment   i m sorry  hiroko .  i ll take her away .     no   said hiroko .   i wish her to do it again .      a few of the nearest alphans had gathered to watch .  fallom furrowed her brow as though trying hard .  the fluorescents dimmed rather more than before  and again there was the note of the flute  this time pure and steady .  then it became erratic as the metal objects along the length of the flute moved of  their own accord .    it s a little different from the   fallom said  a little breathlessly  as though the breath that had been activating the flute had been her own instead of power driven air .   pelorat said to trevize   she must be getting the energy from the electric current that feeds the fluorescents .     try again   said hiroko in a choked voice .   fallom closed her eyes .  the note was softer now and under firmer control .  the flute played by itself  maneuvered by no fingers  but moved by distant energy  transduced through the still immature lobes of fallom s brain .  the notes which began as almost random settled into a musical succession and now everyone in the hall had gathered around hiroko and fallom  as hiroko held the flute gently with thumb and forefinger at either end  and fallom  eyes closed  directed the current of air and the movement of the keys .    it s the piece i played   whispered hiroko .    i remember it   said fallom  nodding her head slightly  trying not to break her concentration .    thou didst not miss a note   said hiroko  when it was done .    but it s not right  hiroko .  you didn t do it right .    bliss said   fallow .  that s not polite .  you mustn t     please   said hiroko peremptorily   do not interfere .  why is it not right  child .     because i would play it differently .     show me  then .    again the flute played  but in more complicated fashion  for the forces that pushed the keys did so more quickly  in more rapid succession and in more elaborate combinations than before .  the music was more complex  and infinitely more emotional and moving .  hiroko stood rigid and there was not a sound to be heard anywhere in the room .   even after fallom had finished playing  there was not a sound until hiroko drew a deep breath and said   little one  hast thou ever played that before .     no   said fallom   before this i could only use my fingers  and i can t do my fingers like that .   then  simply and with no trace of vaunting   no one can .     canst thou play anything else .     i can make something up .     dost thou mean improvise .    fallom frowned at the word and looked toward bliss .  bliss nodded and fallom said   yes .     please do so  then   said hiroko .   fallom paused and thought for a minute or two  then began slowly  in a very simple succession of notes  the whole being rather dreamy .  the fluorescent lights dimmed and brightened as the amount of power exerted intensified and faded .  no one seemed to notice  for it seemed to be the effect of the music rather than the cause  as though a ghostly electrical spirit were obeying the dictates of the sound waves .   the combination of notes then repeated itself a bit more loudly  then a bit more complexly  then in variations that  without ever losing the clearly heard basic combination  became more stirring and more exciting until it was almost impossible to breathe .  and finally  it descended much more rapidly than it had ascended and did so with the effect of a swooping dive that brought the listeners to ground level even while they still retained the feeling that they were high in the air .   there followed sheer pandemonium that split the air  and even trevize  who was used to a totally different kind of music  thought sadly   and now       never hear that again .    when a most reluctant quiet had returned  hiroko held out her flute .   here  fallow  this is thine .    fallom reached for it eagerly  but bliss caught hold of the child s outstretched arm and said   we can t take it  hiroko .  it s a valuable instrument .     i have another  bliss .  not quite as good  but that is how it should be .  this instrument belongeth to the person who playeth it best .  never have i heard such music and it would be wrong for me to own an instrument i cannot use to full potential .  would that i knew how the instrument could be made to play without being touched .    fallom took the flute and  with an expression of deep content  held it tightly to her chest .      .   each of the two rooms of their quarters were lit by one fluorescent light .  the outhouse had a third .  the lights were dim  and were uncomfortable to read by  but at least the rooms were no longer dark .   yet they now lingered outside .  the sky was full of stars  something that was always fascinating to a native of terminus  where the night sky was all but starless and in which only the faint foreshortened cloud of the galaxy was prominent .   hiroko had accompanied them back to their chambers for fear they would get lost in the dark  or that they would stumble .  all the way back  she held fallom s hand  and then  after lighting the fluorescents for them  remained outside with them  still clutching at the youngster .   bliss tried again  for it was clear to her that hiroko was in a state of a difficult conflict of emotions .   really  hiroko  we cannot take your flute .     no  fallom must have it .   but she seemed on edge just the same .   trevize continued to look at the sky .  the night was truly dark  a darkness that was scarcely affected by the trickle of light from their own chambers  and much less so by the tiny sparks of other houses farther off .   he said   hiroko  do you see that star that is so bright .  what is it called .   hiroko looked up casually and said  with no great appearance of interest   that s the companion .     why is it called that .     it circleth our sun every eighty standard years .  it is an evening star at this time of year .  thou canst see it in daytime  too  when it lieth above the horizon .    good  thought trevize .  she s not totally ignorant of astronomy .  he said   do you know that alpha has another companion  a very small  dim one that s much much farther away than that bright star .  you can t see it without a telescope .    he hadn t seen it himself  hadn t bothered to search for it  but the ship s computer had the information in its memory banks .    she said indifferently   we were told that in school .     but now what about that one .  you see those six stars in a zigzag line .    hiroko said   that is cassiopeia .     really .   said trevize  startled .   which star .     all of them .  the whole zigzag .  it is cassiopeia .    .    why is it called that .     i lack the knowledge .  i know nothing of astronomy  respected trevize .     do you see the lowermost star in the zigzag  the one that s brighter than the other stars .  what is that .     it is a star .  i know not its name .     but except for the two companion stars  it s the closest of all the stars to alpha .  it is only a parsec away .    hiroko said   sayest thou so .  i know that not .     might it not be the star about which earth revolves .    hiroko looked at the star with a faint flash of interest .   i know not .  i have never heard any person say so .     don t you think it might be .     how can i say .  none knoweth where earth might be .  i i must leave thee  now .  i will be taking my shift in the fields tomorrow morning before the beach festival .  i ll see you all there  right after lunch .  yes .  yes .     certainly  hiroko .    she left suddenly  half running in the dark .  trevize looked after her  then followed the others into the dimly lit cottage .   he said   can you tell whether she was lying about earth  bliss .    bliss shook her head .   i don t think she was .  she is under enormous tension  something i was not aware of until after the concert .  it existed before you asked her about the stars .     because she gave away her flute  then .     perhaps .  i can t tell .   she turned to fallom .   now  fallom  i want you to go into your room .  when you re ready for bed  go to the outhouse  use the potty  then wash your hands  your face  and your teeth .     i would like to play the flute  bliss .     just for a little while  and very quietly .  do you understand  fallom .  and you must stop when i tell you to .     yes  bliss .    the three were now alone  bliss in the one chair and the men sitting each on his cot .   bliss said   is there any point in staying on this planet any longer .    trevize shrugged .   we never did get to discuss earth in connection with the ancient instruments  and we might find something there .  it might also pay to wait for the fishing fleet to return .  the men might know something the stay at homes don t .     very unlikely  i think   said bliss .   are you sure it s not hiroko s dark eyes that hold you .    trevize said impatiently   i don t understand  bliss .  what have you to do with what i choose to do .  why do you seem to arrogate to yourself the right of sitting in moral judgment on me .     i m not concerned with your morals .  the matter affects our expedition .  you want to find earth so that you can finally decide whether you are right in choosing galaxia over isolate worlds .  i want you to so decide .  you say you need to visit earth to make the decision and you seem to be convinced that earth revolves about that bright star in the sky .  let us go there  then .  i admit it would be useful to have some information about it before we go  but it is clear to me that the information is not forthcoming here .  i do not wish to remain simply because you enjoy hiroko .     perhaps we ll leave   said trevize .   let me think about it  and hiroko will play no part in my decision  i assure you .    pelorat said   i feel we ought to move on to earth  if only to see whether it is radioactive or not .  i see no point in waiting longer .     are you sure it s not bliss s dark eyes that drive you .   said trevize  a bit spitefully .  then  almost at once   no  i take that back  janov .  i was just being childish .  still this is a charming world  quite apart from hiroko  and i must say that under other circumstances  i would be tempted to remain indefinitely .   don t you think  bliss  that alpha destroys your theory about isolates .     in what way .   asked bliss .    you ve been maintaining that every truly isolated world turns dangerous and hostile .     even comporellon   said bliss evenly   which is rather out of the main current of galactic activity for all that it is  in theory  an associated power of the foundation federation .     but not alpha .  this world is totally isolated  but can you complain of their friendliness and hospitality .  they feed us  clothe us  shelter us  put on festivals in our honor  urge us to stay on .  what fault is there to find with them .     none  apparently .  hiroko even gives you her body .    trevize said angrily   bliss  what bothers you about that .  she didn t give me her body .  we gave each other our bodies .  it was entirely mutual  entirely pleasurable .  nor can you say that you hesitate to give your body as it suits you .     please  bliss   said pelorat .   golan is entirely right .  there is no reason to object to his private pleasures .     as long as they don t affect us   said bliss obdurately .    they do not affect us   said trevize .   we will leave  i assure you .  a delay to search further for information will not be long .     yet i don t trust isolates   said bliss   even when they come bearing gifts .    trevize flung up his arms .   reach a conclusion  then twist the evidence to fit .  how like a     don t say it   said bliss dangerously .   i am not a woman .  i am gaia .  it is gaia  not i  who is uneasy .     there is no reason to   and at that point there was a scratching at the door .   trevize froze .   what s that .   he said  in a low voice .   bliss shrugged lightly .   open the door and see .  you tell us this is a kindly world that offers no danger .    nevertheless  trevize hesitated  until a soft voice from the other side of the door called out softly   please .  it is p   it was hiroko s voice .  trevize threw the door open .   hiroko entered quickly .  her cheeks were wet .    close the door   she gasped .    what is it .   asked bliss .   hiroko clutched at trevize .   i could not stay away .  i tried  but i endured it not .  go thou  and all of you .  take the youngster with you quickly .  take the ship away away from alpha while it is yet dark .     but why .   asked trevize .    because else wilt thou die  and all of you .       .   the three outworlders stared frozenly at hiroko for a long moment .  then trevize said   are you saying your people will kill us .    hiroko said  as the tears rolled down her cheeks   thou art already on the road to death  respected trevize .  and the others with you .   long ago  those of learning devised a virus  harmless to us  but deadly to outworlders .  we have been made immune .   she shook trevize s arm in distraction .   thou art infected .     how .     when we had our pleasure .  it is one way .    trevize said   but i feel entirely well .     the virus is as yet inactive .  it will be made active when the fishing fleet returns .  by our laws  all must decide on such a thing even the men .  all will surely decide it must be done  and we keep you here till that time  two mornings hence .  leave now while it is yet dark and none suspects .    bliss said sharply   why do your people do this .     for our safety .  we are few and have much .  we do not wish outworlders to intrude .  if one cometh and then reporteth our lot  others will come  and so when  once in a long while  a ship arriveth  we must make certain it leaveth not .     but then   said trevize   why do you warn us away .     ask not the reason .   nay  but i will tell you  since i hear it again .  listen    from the next room  they could hear fallom playing softly and infinitely sweetly .   hiroko said   i cannot bear the destruction of that music  for the young one will also die .    trevize said sternly   is that why you gave the flute to fallom .  because you knew you would have it once again when she was dead .    hiroko looked horrified .   nay  that was not in my mind .  and when it came to mind at length  i knew it must not be done .  leave with the child  and with her  take the flute that i may never see it more .  thou wilt be safe back in space and  left inactive  the virus now in thy body will die after a time .  in return  i ask that none of you ever speak of this world  that none else may know of it .     we will not speak of it   said trevize .   hiroko looked up .  in a lower voice  she said   may i not kiss thee once ere thou leavest .    trevize said   no .  i have been infected once and surely that is enough .   and then  a little less roughly  he added   don t cry .  people will ask why you are crying and you ll be unable to reply .   i ll forgive what you did to me in view of your present effort to save us .    hiroko straightened  carefully wiped her cheeks with the back of her hands  took a deep breath  and said   i thank thee for that   and left quickly .   trevize said   we will put out the light  and we will wait awhile  and then we will leave .   bliss  tell fallom to stop playing her instrument .  remember to take the flute  of course .   then we will make our way to the ship  if we can find it in the dark .     i will find it   said bliss .   clothing of mine is on board and  however  dimly  that  too  is gaia .  gaia will have no trouble finding gaia .   and she vanished into her room to collect fallom .   pelorat said   do you suppose that they ve managed to damage our ship in order to keep us on the planet .     they lack the technology to do it   said trevize grimly .  when bliss emerged  holding fallom by the hand  trevize put out the lights .   they sat quietly in the dark for what seemed half the night  and might have been half an hour .  then trevize slowly and silently opened the door .  the sky seemed a bit more cloudy  but stars shone .  high in the sky now was cassiopeia  with what might be earth s sun burning brightly at its lower tip .  the air was still and there was no sound .   carefully  trevize stepped out  motioning the others to follow .  one of his hands dropped  almost automatically  to the butt of his neuronic whip .  he was sure he would not have to use it  but   bliss took the lead  holding pelorat s hand  who held trevize s .  bliss s other hand held fallom  and fa  om s other hand held the flute .  feeling gently with her feet in the nearly total darkness  bliss guided the others toward where she felt  very weakly  the gaia ness of her clothing on board the far star .     part seven   earth    chapter       radioactive .        .     the far star took off quietly  rising slowly through the atmosphere  leaving the dark island below .  the few faint dots of light beneath them dimmed and vanished  and as the atmosphere grew thinner with height  the ship s speed grew greater  and the dots of light in the sky above them grew more numerous and brighter .   eventually  they looked down upon the planet  alpha  with only a crescent illuminated and that crescent largely wreathed in clouds .   pelorat said   i suppose they don t have an active space technology .  they can t follow us .     i m not sure that that cheers me up much   said trevize  his face dour  his voice disheartened .   i m infected .     but with an inactive strain   said bliss .    still  it can be made active .  they had a method .  what is the method .    bliss shrugged .   hiroko said the virus  left inactive  would eventually die in a body unadapted to it as yours is .     yes .   said trevize angrily .   how does she know that .  for that matter  how do i know that hiroko s statement wasn t a self consoling lie .  and isn t it possible that the method of activation  whatever it is  might not be duplicated naturally .  a particular chemical  a type of radiation  a a who knows what .  i may sicken suddenly  and then the three of you would die  too .  or if it happens after we have reached a populated world  there may be a vicious pandemic which fleeing refugees would carry to other worlds .    he looked at bliss .   is there something you can do about it .    slowly  bliss shook her head .   not easily .  there are parasites making up gaia microorganisms  worms .  they are a benign part of the ecological balance .  they live and contribute to the world consciousness  but never overgrow .  they live without doing noticeable harm .  the trouble is  trevize  the virus that affects you is not part of gaia .     you say  not easily    said trevize  frowning .   under the circumstances  can you take the trouble to do it even though it might be difficult .  can you locate the virus in me and destroy it .  can you  failing that  at least strengthen my defenses .     do you realize what you ask  trevize .  i am not acquainted with the microscopic flora of your body .  i might not easily tell a virus in the cells of your body from the normal genes inhabiting them .  it would be even more difficult to distinguish between viruses your body is accustomed to and those with which hiroko infected you .  i will try to do it  trevize  but it will take time and i may not succeed .     take time   said trevize .   try .     certainly   said bliss .   pelorat said   if hiroko told the truth  bliss  you might be able to find viruses that seem to be already diminishing in vitality  and you could accelerate their decline .     i could do that   said bliss .   it is a good thought .     you won t weaken .   said trevize .   you will have to destroy precious bits of life when you kill those viruses  you know .     you are being sardonic  trevize   said bliss coolly   but  sardonic or not  you are pointing out a true difficulty .  still  i can scarcely fail to put you ahead of the virus .  i will kill them if i have the chance  never fear .  after all  even if i fail to consider you  and her mouth twitched as though she were repressing a smile  then certainly pelorat and fallom are also at risk  and you might feel more confidence in my feeling for them than in my feeling for you .  you might even remember that i myself am at risk .     i have no faith in your self love   muttered trevize .   you re perfectly ready to give up your life for some high motive .  i ll accept your concern for pelorat  however .   then  he said   i don t hear fallom s flute .  is anything wrong with her .     no   said bliss .   she s asleep .  a perfectly natural sleep that i had nothing to do with .  and i would suggest that  after you work out the jump to the star we think is earth s sun  we all do likewise .  i need it badly and i suspect you do  too  trevize .     yes  if i can manage .   you were right  you know  bliss .     about what  trevize .     about isolates .  new earth was not a paradise  however much it might have seemed like one .  that hospitality all that outgoing friendliness at first  was to put us off our guard  so that one of us might be easily infected .  and all the hospitality afterward  the festivals of this and that  were designed to keep us there till the fishing fleet returned and the activation could be carried through .  and it would have worked but for fallom and her music .  it might be you were right there  too .         about fallom .     yes .  i didn t want to take her along  and i ve never been happy with her being on the ship .  it was your doing  bliss  that we have her here and it was she who  unwittingly  saved us .  and yet     and yet what .     despite that  i m still uneasy at fallom s presence .  i don t know why .     if it will make you feel better  trevize  i don t know that we can lay all the credit at fallom s feet .  hiroko advanced fallom s music as her excuse for committing what the other alphans would surely consider to be an act of treason .  she may even have believed this  but there was something in her mind in addition  something that i vaguely detected but could not surely identify  something that perhaps she was ashamed to let emerge into her conscious mind .  i am under the impression that she felt a warmth for you  and would not willingly see you die  regardless of fallom and her music .     do you really think so .   said trevize  smiling slightly for the first time since they had left alpha .    i think so .  you must have a certain proficiency at dealing with women .  you persuaded minister lizalor to allow us to take our ship and leave comporellon  and you helped influence hiroko to save our lives .  credit where it s due .    trevize smiled more broadly .   well  if you say so .   on to earth  then .   he disappeared into the pilot room with a step that was almost jaunty .   pelorat  lingering behind  said   you soothed him after all  didn t you  bliss .     no  pelorat  i never touched his mind .     you certainly did when you pampered his male vanity so outrageously .     entirely indirect   said bliss  smiling .    even so  thank you  bliss .       .   after the jump  the star that might well be earth s sun was still a tenth of a parsec away .  it was the brightest object in the sky by far  but it was still no more than a star .   trevize kept its light filtered for ease of viewing  and studied it somberly .   he said   there seems no doubt that it is the virtual twin of alpha  the star that new earth circles .  yet alpha is in the computer map and this star is not .  we don t have a name for this star  we aren t given its statistics  we lack any information concerning its planetary system  if it has one .    pelorat said   isn t that what we would expect if earth circles this sun .   such a blackout of information would fit with the fact that all information about earth seems to have been eliminated .     yes  but it could also mean that it s a spacer world that just happened not to be on the list on the wall of the melpomenian building .  we can t be altogether sure that that list was complete .  or this star could be without planets and therefore perhaps not worth listing on a computer map which is primarily used for military and commercial purposes .   janov  is there any legend that tells of earth s sun being a mere parsec or so from a twin of itself .    pelorat shook his head .   i m sorry  golan  but no such legend occurs to me .  there may be one  though .  my memory isn t perfect .  i ll search for it .     it s not important .  is there any name given to earth s sun .     some different names are given .  i imagine there must be a name in each of the different languages .     i keep forgetting that earth had many languages .     it must have had .  it s the only way of making sense out of many of the legends .    trevize said peevishly   well  then  what do we do .  we can t tell anything about the planetary system from this distance  and we have to move closer .  i would like to be cautious  but there s such a thing as excessive and unreasoning caution  and i see no evidence of possible danger .  presumably anything powerful enough to wipe the galaxy clean of information about earth may be powerful enough to wipe us out even at this distance if they seriously did not wish to be located  but nothing s happened .  it isn t rational to stay here forever on the mere possibility that something might happen if we move closer  is it .    bliss said   i take it the computer detects nothing that might be interpreted as dangerous .     when i say i see no evidence of possible danger  it s the computer i m relying on .  i certainly can t see anything with the unaided eye .  i wouldn t expect to .     then i take it you re just looking for support in making what you consider a risky decision .  all right  then .  i m with you .  we haven t come this far in order to turn back for no reason  have we .     no   said trevize .   what do you say  pelorat .    pelorat said   i m willing to move on  if only out of curiosity .  it would be unbearable to go back without knowing if we have found earth .     well  then   said trevize   we re all agreed .     not all   said pelorat .   there s fallom .    trevize looked astonished .   are you suggesting we consult the child .  of what value would her opinion be even if she had one .  besides  all she would want would be to get back to her own world .     can you blame her for that .   asked bliss warmly .   and because the matter of fallom had arisen  trevize became aware of her flute  which was sounding in a rather stirring march rhythm .    listen to her   he said .   where has she ever heard anything in march rhythm .     perhaps jemby played marches on the flute for her .    trevize shook his head .   i doubt it .  dance rhythms  i should think  lullabies .   listen  fallom makes me uneasy .  she learns too quickly .     i help her   said bliss .   remember that .  and she s very intelligent and she has been extraordinarily stimulated in the time she s been with us .  new sensations have flooded her mind .  she s seen space  different worlds  many people  all for the first time .    fallom s march music grew wilder and more richly barbaric .   trevize sighed and said   well  she s here  and she s producing music that seems to breathe optimism  and delight in adventure .  i ll take that as her vote in favor of moving in more closely .  let us do so cautiously  then  and check this sun s planetary system .     if any   said bliss .   trevize smiled thinly .   there s a planetary system .  it s a bet .  choose your sum .       .    you lose   said trevize abstractedly .   how much money did you decide to bet .     none .  i never accepted the wager   said bliss .    just as well .  i wouldn t like to accept the money  anyway .    they were some    billion kilometers from the sun .  it was still star like  but it was nearly         as bright as the average sun would have been when viewed from the surface of a habitable planet .    we can see two planets under magnification  right now   said trevize .   from their measured diameters and from the spectrum of the reflected light  they are clearly gas giants .    the ship was well outside the planetary plane  and bliss and pelorat  staring over trevize s shoulder at the viewscreen  found themselves looking at two tiny crescents of greenish light .  the smaller was in the somewhat thicker phase of the two .   trevize said   janov .  it is correct  isn t it  that earth s sun is suppose to have four gas giants .     according to the legends .  yes   said pelorat .    the nearest of the four to the sun is the largest  and the second nearest has rings .  right .     large prominent rings  golan .  yes .  just the same  old chap  you have to allow for exaggeration in the telling and retelling of a legend .  if we should not find a planet with an extraordinary ring system  i don t think we ought to let that count seriously against this being earth s star .     nevertheless  the two we see may be the farthest  and the two nearer ones may well be on the other side of the sun and too far  . to be easily located against the background of stars .  we ll have to move still closer and beyond the sun to the other side .     can that be done in the presence of the star s nearby mass .     with reasonable caution  the computer can do it  i m sure .  if it judges the danger to be too great  however  it will refuse to budge us  and we can then move in cautious  smaller steps .    his mind directed the computer and the starfield on the viewscreen changed .  the star brightened sharply and then moved off the viewscreen as the computer  following directions  scanned the sky for another gas giant .  it did so successfully .   all three onlookers stiffened and stared  while trevize s mind  almost helpless with astonishment  fumbled at the computer to direct further magnification .    incredible   gasped bliss .      .   a gas giant was in view  seen at an angle that allowed most of it to be sunlit .  about it  there curved a broad and brilliant ring of material  tipped so as to catch the sunlight on the side being viewed .  it was brighter than the planet itself and along it  one third of the way in toward the planet  was a narrow  dividing line .   trevize threw in a request for maximum enhancement and the ring became ringlets  narrow and concentric  glittering in the sunlight .  only a portion of the ring system was visible on the viewscreen and the planet itself had moved o   a further direction from trevize and one corner of the screen marked itself off and showed  within itself  a miniature of the planet and rings under lesser magnification .    is that sort of thing common .   asked bliss  awed .    no   said trevize .   almost every gas giant has rings of debris  but they tend to be faint and narrow .  i once saw one in which the rings were narrow  but quite bright .  but i never saw anything like this  or heard of it  either .    pelorat said   that s clearly the ringed giant the legends speak of .  if this is really unique     really unique  as far as i know  or as far as the computer knows   said trevize .    then this must be the planetary system containing earth .  surely  no one could invent such a planet .  it would have had to have been seen to be described .    trevize said   i m prepared to believe just about anything your legends say now .  this is the sixth planet and earth would be the third .     right  golan .     then i would say we were less than   .   billion kilometers from earth  and we haven t been stopped .  gaia stopped us when we approached .    bliss said   you were closer to gaia when you were stopped .     ah   said trevize   but it s my opinion earth is more powerful than gaia  and i take this to be a good sign .  if we are not stopped  it may be that earth does not object to our approach .     or that there is no earth   said bliss .    do you care to bet this time .   asked trevize grimly .    what i think bliss means   put in pelorat   is that earth may be radioactive as everyone seems to think  and that no one stops us because there is no life on the earth .     no   said trevize violently .   i ll believe everything that s said about earth  but that .  we ll just close in on earth and see for ourselves .  and i have the feeling we won t be stopped .       .   the gas giants were well behind .  an asteroid belt lay just inside the gas giant nearest the sun .   that gas giant was the largest and most massive  just as the legends said .    inside the asteroid belt were four planets .   trevize studied them carefully .   the third is the largest .  the size is appropriate  . and the distance from the sun is appropriate .  it could be habitable .    pelorat caught what seemed to be a note of uncertainty in trevize s words .   he said   does it have an atmosphere .     oh yes   said trevize .   the second  third  and fourth planets all have atmospheres .  and  as in the old children s tale  the second s is too dense  the fourth s is not dense enough  but the third s is just right .     do you think it might be earth  then .     think .   said trevize almost explosively .   i don t have to think .  it is earth .  it has the giant satellite you told me of .     it has .   and pelorat s face broke into a wider smile than any that trevize had ever seen upon it .    absolutely .  here  look at it under maximum magnification .    pelorat saw two crescents  one distinctly larger and brighter than the other .    is that smaller one the satellite .   he asked .    yes .  it s rather farther from the planet than one might expect but it s definitely revolving about it .  it s only the size of a small planet  in fact  it s smaller than any of the four inner planets circling the sun .  still  it s large for a satellite .  it s at least two thousand kilometers in diameter  which makes it in the size range of the large satellites that revolve about gas giants .     no larger .   pelorat seemed disappointed .   then it s not a giant satellite .     yes  it is .  a satellite with a diameter of two to three thousand kilometers that is circling an enormous gas giant is one thing .  that same satellite circling a small  rocky habitable planet is quite another .  that satellite has a diameter over a quarter that of earth .  where have you heard of such near parity involving a habitable planet .    pelorat said timidly   i know very little of such things .    trevize said   then take my word for it  janov .  it s unique .  we re looking at something that is practically a double planet  and there are few habitable planets that have anything more than pebbles orbiting them .  janov  if you consider that gas giant with its enormous ring system in sixth place  and this planet with its enormous satellite in third both of which your legends told you about  against all credibility  before you ever saw them then that world you re looking at must be earth .  it cannot conceivably be anything else .  we ve found it  janov  we ve found it .       .   they were on the second day of their coasting progress toward earth  and bliss yawned over the dinner meal .  she said   it seems to me we ve spent more time coasting toward and away from planets than anything else .  we ve spent weeks at it  literally .     partly   said trevize   that s because jumps are dangerous too close to a star .  and in this case  we re moving very slowly because i do not wish to advance into possible danger too quickly .     i thought you said you had the feeling we would not be stopped .     so i do  but i don t want to stake everything on a feeling .   trevize looked at the contents of the spoon before putting it into his mouth and said   you know  i miss the fish we had on alpha .  we only had three meals there .     a pity   agreed pelorat .    well   said bliss   we visited five worlds and had to leave each one of them so hurriedly that we never had time to add to our food supplies and introduce variety .  even when the world had food to offer  as did comporellon and alpha  and  presumably    she did not complete the sentence  for fallom  looking up quickly  finished it for her .   solaria .  could you get no food there .  there is plenty of food there .  as much as on alpha .  and better  too .     i know that  fallom   said bliss .   there was just no time .    fallom stared at her solemnly .   will i ever see jemby again  bliss .  tell me the truth .    bliss said   you may  if we return to solaria .     will we ever return to solaria .    bliss hesitated .   i cannot say .     now we go to earth  is that right .  isn t that the planet where you say we all originate .     where our forebears originated   said bliss .    i can say  ancestors    said fallom .    yes  we are going to earth .    bliss said lightly   wouldn t anyone wish to see the world of their ancestors .     i think there s more to it .  you all seem so concerned .     but we ve never been there before .  we don t know what to expect .     i think it is more than that .    bliss smiled .   you ve finished eating  fallom dear  so why not go to the room and let us have a little serenade on your flute .  you re playing it more beautifully all the time .  come  come .   she gave fallom an accelerating pat on the rear end  and off fallom went  turning only once to give trevize a thoughtful look .   trevize looked after her with clear distaste .   does that thing read minds .     don t call her a  thing   trevize   said bliss sharply .    does she read minds .  you ought to be able to tell .     no  she doesn t .  nor can gaia .  nor can the second foundationers .  reading minds in the sense of overhearing a conversation  or making out precise ideas is not something that can be done now  or in the foreseeable future .  we can detect  interpret  and  to some extent  manipulate emotions  but that is not the same thing at all .     how do you know she can t do this thing that supposedly can t be done .     because as you have just said  i ought to be able to tell .     perhaps she is manipulating you so that you remain ignorant of the fact that she can .    bliss rolled her eyes upward .   be reasonable  trevize .  even if she had unusual abilities  she could do nothing with me for i am not bliss  i am gaia .  you keep forgetting .  do you know the mental inertia represented by an entire planet .  do you think one isolate  however talented  can overcome that .     you don t know everything  bliss  so don t be overconfident   said trevize sullenly .   that th  she has been with us not very long .  i couldn t learn anything but the rudiments of a language in that time  yet she already speaks galactic perfectly and with virtually a full vocabulary .  yes  i know you ve been helping her  but i wish you would stop .     i told you i was helping her  but i also told you she s fearfully intelligent .  intelligent enough so that i would like to have her part of gaia .  if we can gather her in  if she s still young enough  we might learn enough about the solarians to absorb that entire world eventually .  it might well be useful to us .     does it occur to you that the solarians are pathological isolates even by my standards .     they wouldn t stay so as part of gaia .     i think you re wrong  bliss .  i think that solarian child is dangerous and that we should get rid of her .     how .  dump her through the airlock .  kill her  chop her up  and add her to our food supply .    pelorat said   oh  bliss .    and trevize said   that s disgusting  and completely uncalled for .   he listened for a moment .  the flute was sounding without flaw or waver  and they had been talking in half whispers .   when this is all over  we ve got to return her to solaria  and make sure that solaria is forever cut off from the galaxy .  my own feeling is that it should be destroyed .  i distrust and fear it .    bliss thought awhile and said   trevize  i know that you have the knack of coming to a right decision  but i also know you have been antipathetic to fallom from the start .  i suspect that may just be because you were humiliated on solaria and have taken a violent hatred to the planet and its inhabitants as a result .  since i must not tamper with your mind  i can t tell that for sure .  please remember that if we had not taken fallom with us  we would be on alpha right now dead and  i presume  buried .     i know that  bliss  but even so     and her intelligence is to be admired  not envied .     i do not envy her .  i fear her .     her intelligence .    trevize licked his lips thoughtfully .   no  not quite .     what  then .     i don t know .  bliss  if i knew what i feared  i might not have to fear it .  it s something i don t quite understand .   his voice lowered  as though he were speaking to himself .   the galaxy seems to be crowded with things i don t understand .  why did i choose gaia .  why must i find earth .  is there a missing assumption in psychohistory .  if there is  what is it .  and on top of all that  why does fallom make me uneasy .    bliss said   unfortunately  i can t answer those questions .   she rose  and left the room .   pelorat looked after her  then said   surely things aren t totally black  golan .  we re getting closer and closer to earth and once we reach it all mysteries may be solved .  and so far nothing seems to be making any effort to stop us from reaching it .    trevize s eyes flickered toward pelorat and he said in a low voice   i wish something would .    pelorat said   you do .  why should you want that .     frankly  i d welcome a sign of life .    pelorat s eyes opened wide .   have you found that earth is radioactive after all .     not quite .  but it is warm .  a bit warmer than i would have expected .     is that bad .     not necessarily .  it may be rather warm but that wouldn t make it necessarily uninhabitable .  the cloud cover is thick and it is definitely water vapor  so that those clouds  together with a copious water ocean  could tend to keep things livable despite the temperature we calculated from microwave emission .  i can t be sure  yet .  it s just that     yes  golan .     well  if earth were radioactive  that might well account for its being warmer than expected .     but that doesn t argue the reverse  does it .  if it s warmer than expected  that doesn t mean it must be radioactive .     no .  no  it doesn t .   trevize managed to force a smile .   no use brooding  janov .  in a day or two  i ll be able to tell more about it and we ll know for sure .       .   fallom was sitting on the cot in deep thought when bliss came into the room .  fallom looked up briefly  then down again .   bliss said quietly   what s the matter  fallom .    fallom said   why does trevize dislike me so much  bliss .     what makes you think he dislikes you .     he looks at me impatiently  is that the word .     it might be the word .     he looks at me impatiently when i am near him .  his face always twists a little .     trevize is having a hard time  fallom .     because he s looking for earth .     yes .    fallom thought awhile  then said   he is particularly impatient when i think something into moving .    bliss s lips tightened .   now  fallom  didn t i tell you you must not do that  especially when trevize is present .     well  it was yesterday  right here in this room  and he was in the doorway and i didn t notice .  i didn t know he was watching .  it was just one of pel s book films  anyway  and i was trying to make it stand on one tip .  i wasn t doing any harm .     it makes him nervous  fallom  and i want you not to do it  whether he s watching or not .     does it make him nervous because he can t do it .     perhaps .     can you do it .    bliss shook her head slowly .   no  i can t .     it doesn t make you nervous when i do it .  it doesn t make pel nervous  either .     people are different .     i know   said fallom  with a sudden hardness that surprised bliss and caused her to frown .    what do you know  fallow .     i m different .     of course  i just said so .  people are different .     my shape is different .  i can move things .     that s true .    fallow said  with a shade of rebelliousness   i must move things .  trevize should not be angry with me for that  and you should not stop me .     but why must you move things .     it is practice .  exerceez .   is that the right word .     not quite .  exercise .     yes .  jemby always said i must train my my     transducer lobes .     yes .  and make them strong .  then  when i was grown up  i could power all the robots .  even jemby .     fallow  who did power all the robots if you did not .     bander .   fallom said it very matter of factly .    did you know bander .     of course .  i viewed him many times .  i was to be the next estate head .  the bander estate would become the fallom estate .  jemby told me so .     you mean bander came to your    fallom s mouth made a perfect o of shock .  she said in a choked voice   bander would never come to   the youngster ran out of breath and panted a bit  then said   i viewed bander s image .    bliss asked hesitantly   how did bander treat you .    fallom looked at bliss with a faintly puzzled eye .   bander would ask me if i needed anything  if i was comfortable .  but jemby was always near me so i never needed anything and i was always comfortable .    her head bent and she stared at the floor .  then she placed her hands over her eyes and said   but jemby stopped .  i think it was because banderstopped  too .    bliss said   why do you say that .     i ve been thinking about it .  bander powered all the robots  and if jemby stopped  and all the other robots  too  it must be that bander stopped .  isn t that so .    bliss was silent .   fallow said   but when you take me back to solaria i will power jemby and all the rest of the robots  and i will be happy again .    she was sobbing .   bliss said   aren t you happy with us  fallom .  just a little .  sometimes .    fallom lifted her tear stained face to bliss and her voice trembled as she shook her head and said   i want jemby .    in an agony of sympathy  bliss threw her arms about the youngster .   oh  fallom  how i wish i could bring you and jemby together again   and was suddenly aware that she was weeping  too .      .   pelorat entered and found them so .  he halted in mid step and said   what s the matter .    bliss detached herself and fumbled for a small tissue so that she might wipe her eyes .  she shook her head  and pelorat at once said  with heightened concern   but what s the matter .    bliss said   fallow  just rest a little .  i ll think of something to make things a little better for you .  remember i love you just the same way that jemby did .    she seized pelorat s elbow and rushed him out into the living room  saying   it s nothing  pel .   nothing .     it s fallom  though  isn t it .  she still misses jemby .     terribly .  and there s nothing we can do about it .  i can tell her that i love her and  truthfully  i do .  how can you help loving a child so intelligent and gentle .   fearfully intelligent .  trevize thinks too intelligent .  she s seen bander in her time  you know or viewed it  rather  as a holographic image .  she s not moved by that memory  however  she s very cold and matter of fact about it  and i can understand why .  there was only the fact that bander was owner of the estate and that fallom would be the next owner that bound them .  no other relationship at all .     does fallom understand that bander is her father .     her mother .  if we agree that fallom is to be regarded as feminine  so is bander .     either way  bliss dear .  is fallow aware of the parental relationship .     i don t know that she would understand what that is .  she may  of course  but she gave no hint .  however  pel  she has reasoned out that bander is dead  for it s dawned on her that jemby s inactivation must be the result of power loss and since bander supplied the power  that frightens me .    pelorat said thoughtfully   why should it  bliss .  it s only a logical inference  after all .     another logical inference can be drawn from that death .  deaths must be few and far distant on solaria with its long lived and isolated spacers .  experience of natural death must be a limited one for any of them  and probably absent altogether for a solarian child of fallom s age .  if fallom continues to think of bander s death  she s going to begin to wonder why bander died  and the fact that it happened when we strangers were on the planet will surely lead her to the obvious cause and effect .     that we killed bander .     it wasn t we who killed bander  pel .  it was i .      she couldn t guess that .     but i would have to tell her that .  she is annoyed with trevize as it is  and he is clearly the leader of the expedition .  she would take it for granted that it would be he who would have brought about the death of bander  and how could i allow trevize to bear the blame unjustly .     what would it matter  bliss .  the child feels nothing for her fathmother .  only for her robot  jemby .     but the death of the mother meant the death of her robot  too .  i almost did own up to my responsibility .  i was strongly tempted .     why .     so i could explain it my way .  so i could soothe her  forestall her own discovery of the fact in a reasoning process that would work it out in a way that would offer no justification for it .     but there was justification .  it was self defense .  in a moment  we all would have been dead  if you had not acted .     it s what i would have said  but i could not bring myself to explain .  i was afraid she wouldn t believe me .    pelorat shook his head .  he said  sighing   do you suppose it might have been better if we had not brought her .  the situation makes you so unhappy .     no   said bliss angrily   don t say that .  it would have made me infinitely more unhappy to have to sit here right now and remember that we had left an innocent child behind to be slaughtered mercilessly because of what we had done .     it s the way of fallom s world .     now  pel  don t fall into trevize s way of thinking .  isolates find it possible to accept such things and think no more about it .  the way of gaia is to save life  however  not destroy it or to sit idly by while it is destroyed .  life of all kinds must  we all know  constantly be coming to an end in order that other life might endure  but never uselessly  never to no end .  bander s death  though unavoidable  is hard enough to bear  fallom s would have been past all bounds .     ah well   said pelorat   i suppose you re right .   and in any case  it is not the problem of fallom concerning which i ve come to see you .  it s trevize .     what about trevize .     bliss  i m worried about him .  he s waiting to determine the facts about earth  and i m not sure he can withstand the strain .     i don t fear for him .  i suspect he has a sturdy and stable mind .     we all have our limits .  listen  the planet earth is warmer than he expected it to be  he told me so .  i suspect that he thinks it may be too warm for life  though he s clearly trying to talk himself into believing that s not so .     maybe he s right .  maybe it s not too warm for life .     also  he admits it s possible that the warmth might possibly arise from a radioactive crust  but he is refusing to believe that also .   in a day or two  we ll be close enough so that the truth of the matter will be unmistakable .  what if earth is radioactive .     then he ll have to accept the fact .     but i don t know how to say this  or how to put it in mental terms .  what if his mind    bliss waited  then said wryly   blows a fuse .     yes .  blows a fuse .  shouldn t you do something now to strengthen him .  keep him level and under control  so to speak .     no  pel .  i can t believe he s that fragile  and there is a firm gaian decision that his mind must not be tampered with .     but that s the very point .  he has this unusual  rightness   or whatever you want to call it .  the shock of his entire project falling to nothingness at the moment when it seems successfully concluded may not destroy his brain  but it may destroy his  rightness .   it s a very unusual property he has .  might it not be unusually fragile  too .    bliss remained for a moment in thought .  then she shrugged .   well  perhaps i ll keep an eye on him .       .   for the next thirty six hours  trevize was vaguely aware that bliss and  to a lesser degree  pelorat  tended to dog his footsteps .  still  that was not utterly unusual in a ship as compact as theirs  and he had other things on his mind .   now  as he sat at the computer  he was aware of them standing just inside the doorway .  he looked up at them  his face blank .    well .   he said  in a very quiet voice .   pelorat said  rather awkwardly   how are you  golan .    trevize said   ask bliss .  she s been staring at me intently for hours .  she must be poking through my mind .   aren t you  bliss .     no  i am not   said bliss evenly   but if you feel the need for my help  i can try .   do you want my help .     no  why should i .  leave me alone .  both of you .    pelorat said   please tell us what s going on .     guess .     is earth     yes  it is .  what everyone insisted on telling us is perfectly true .   trevize gestured at the viewscreen  where earth presented its nightside and was eclipsing the sun .  it was a solid circle of black against the starry sky  its circumference outlined by a broken orange curve .   pelorat said   is that orange the radioactivity .     no .  just refracted sunlight through the atmosphere .  it would be a solid orange circle if the atmosphere weren t so cloudy .  we can t see the radioactivity .  the various radiations  even the gamma rays  are absorbed by the atmosphere .  however  they do set up secondary radiations  comparatively feeble ones  but the computer can detect them .  they re still invisible to the eye  but the computer can produce a photon of visible light for each particle or wave of radiation it receives and put earth into false color .  look .    and the black circle glowed with a faint  blotchy blue .    how much radioactivity is there .   asked bliss  in a low voice .   enough to signify that no human life can exist there .     no life of any kind   said trevize .   the planet is uninhabitable .  the last bacterium  the last virus  is long gone .     can we explore it .   said pelorat .   i mean  in space suits .     for a few hours before we come down with irreversible radiation sickness .     then what do we do  golan .     do .   trevize looked at pelorat with that same expressionless face .   do you know what i would like to do .  i would like to take you and bliss and the child back to gaia and leave you all there forever .  then i would like to go back to terminus and hand back the ship .  then i would like to resign from the council  which ought to make mayor branno very happy .  then i would like to live on my pension and let the galaxy go as it will .  i won t care about the seldon plan  or about the foundation  or about the second foundation  or about gaia .  the galaxy can choose its own path .  it will last my time and why should i care a snap as to what happens afterward .     surely  you don t mean it  golan   said pelorat urgently .   trevize stared at him for a while  and then he drew a long breath .   no  i don t  but  oh  how i wish i could do exactly what i have just outlined to you .     never mind that .  what will you do .     keep the ship in orbit about the earth  rest  get over the shock of all this  and think of what to do next .  except that     yes .    and trevize blurted out   what can i do next .  what is there further to look for .  what is there further to find .      chapter       the nearby world       .     for four successive meals  pelorat and bliss had seen trevize only at meals .  during the rest of the time  he was either in the pilot room or in his bedroom .  at mealtimes  he was silent .  his lips remained pressed together and he ate little .   at the fourth meal  however  it seemed to pelorat that some of the unusual gravity had lifted from trevize s countenance .  pelorat cleared his throat twice  as though preparing to say something and then retreating .   finally  trevize looked up at him and said   well .     have you have you thought it out  golan .     why do you ask .     you seem less gloomy .     i m not less gloomy  but i have been thinking .  heavily .     may we know what .   asked pelorat .   trevize glanced briefly in bliss s direction .  she was looking firmly at her plate  maintaining a careful silence  as though certain that pelorat would get further than she at this sensitive moment .   trevize said   are you also curious  bliss .    she raised her eyes for a moment .   yes .  certainly .    fallom kicked a leg of the table moodily  and said   have we found earth .    bliss squeezed the youngster s shoulder .  trevize paid no attention .   he said   what we must start with is a basic fact .  all information concerning earth has been removed on various worlds .  that is bound to bring us to an inescapable conclusion .  something on earth is being hidden .  and yet  by observation  we see that earth is radioactively deadly  so that anything on it is automatically hidden .  no one can land on it  and from this distance  when we are quite near the outer edge of the magnetosphere and would not care to approach earth any more closely  there is nothing for us to find .     can you be sure of that .   asked bliss softly .    i have spent my time at the computer  analyzing earth in every way it and i can .  there is nothing .  what s more  i feel there is nothing .  why  then  has data concerning the earth been wiped out .  surely  whatever must be hidden is more effectively hidden now than anyone can easily imagine  and there need be no human gilding of this particular piece of gold .     it may be   said pelorat   that there was indeed something hidden on earth at a time when it had not yet grown so severely radioactive as to preclude visitors .  people on earth may then have feared that someone might land and find this whatever it is .  it was then that earth tried to remove information concerning itself .  what we have now is a vestigial remnant of that insecure time .     no  i don t think so   said trevize .   the removal of information from the imperial library at trantor seems to have taken place very recently .   he turned suddenly to bliss   am i right .    bliss said evenly   i we gaia gathered that much from the troubled mind of the second foundationer gendibal  when he  you  and i had the meeting with the mayor of terminus .    trevize said   so whatever must have had to be hidden because there existed the chance of finding it must still be in hiding now  and there must be danger of finding it now despite the fact that earth is radioactive .     how is that possible .   asked pelorat anxiously .    consider   said trevize .   what if what was on earth is no longer on earth  but was removed when the radioactive danger grew greater .  yet though the secret is no longer on earth  it may be that if we can find earth  we would be able to reason out the place where the secret has been taken .  if that were so  earth s whereabouts would still have to be hidden .    fallom s voice piped up again .   because if we can t find earth  bliss says you ll take me back to jemby .    trevize turned toward fallom and glared and bliss said  in a low voice   i told you we might  fallom .  we ll talk about it later .  right now  go to your room and read  or play the flute  or anything else you want to do .  go go .    fallom  frowning sulkily  left the table .   pelorat said   but how can you say that  golan .  here we are .  we ve located earth .  can we now deduce where whatever it is might be if it isn t on earth .    it took a moment for trevize to get over the moment of ill humor fallom had induced .  then  he said   why not .  imagine the radioactivity of earth s crust growing steadily worse .  the population would be decreasing steadily through death and emigration  and the secret  whatever it is  would be in increasing danger .  who would remain to protect it .  eventually  it would have to be shifted to another world  or the use of whatever it was would be lost to earth .  i suspect there would be reluctance to move it and it is likely that it would be done more or less at the last minute .  now  then  janov  remember the old man on new earth who filled your ears with his version of earth s history .     monolee .     yes .  he .  did he not say in reference to the establishment of new earth that what was left of earth s population was brought to the planet .    pelorat said   do you mean  old chap  that what we re searching for is now on new earth .  brought there by the last of earth s population to leave .    trevize said   might that not be so .  new earth is scarcely better known to the galaxy in general than earth is  and the inhabitants are suspiciously eager to keep all outworlders away .     we were there   put in bliss .   we didn t find anything .     we weren t looking for anything but the whereabouts of earth .    pelorat said  in a puzzled way   but we re looking for something with a high technology  something that can remove information from under the nose of the second foundation itself  and even from under the nose excuse me  bliss of gaia .  those people on new earth may be able to control their patch of weather and may have some techniques of biotechnology at their disposal  but i think you ll admit that their level of technology is  on the whole  quite low .    bliss nodded .   i agree with pel .    trevize said   we re judging from very little .  we never did see the men of the fishing fleet .  we never saw any part of the island but the small patch we landed on .  what might we have found if we had explored more thoroughly .  after all  we didn t recognize the fluorescent lights till we saw them in action  and if it appeared that the technology was low  appeared  i say     yes .   said bliss  clearly unconvinced .    that could be part of the veil intended to obscure the truth .     impossible   said bliss .    impossible .  it was you who told me  back on gaia  that at trantor  the larger civilization was deliberately held at a level of low technology in order to hide the small kernel of second foundationers .  why might not the same strategy be used on new earth .     do you suggest  then  that we return to new earth and face infection again this time to have it activated .  sexual intercourse is undoubtedly a particularly pleasant mode of infection  but it may not be the only one .    trevize shrugged .   i am not eager to return to new earth  but we may have to .     may .  after all  there is another possibility .     what is that .     new earth circles the star the people call alpha .  but alpha is part of a binary system .  might there not be a habitable planet circling alpha s companion as well .     too dim  i should think   said bliss  shaking her head .   the companion is only a quarter as bright as alpha is .     dim  but not too dim .  if there is a planet fairly close to the star  it might do .    pelorat said   does the computer say anything about any planets for the companion .    trevize smiled grimly .   i checked that .  there are five planets of moderate size .  no gas giants .     and are any of the five planets habitable .     the computer gives no information at all about the planets  other than their number  and the fact that they aren t large .     oh   said pelorat deflated .   trevize said   that s nothing to be disappointed about .  none of the spacer worlds are to be found in the computer at all .  the information on alpha itself is minimal .  these things are hidden deliberately and if almost nothing is known about alpha s companion  that might almost be regarded as a good sign .     then   said bliss  in a business like manner   what you are planning to do is this visit the companion and  if that draws a blank  return to alpha itself .     yes .  and this time when we reach the island of new earth  we will be prepared .  we will examine the entire island meticulously before landing and  bliss  i expect you to use your mental abilities to shield    and at that moment  the far star lurched slightly  as though it had undergone a ship sized hiccup  and trevize cried out  halfway between anger and perplexity   who s at the controls .    and even as he asked  he knew very well who was .      .   fallom  at the computer console  was completely absorbed .  her small  longfingered hands were stretched wide in order to fit the faintly gleaming handmarks on the desk .  fallom s hands seemed to sink into the material of the desk  even though it was clearly felt to be hard and slippery .   she had seen trevize hold his hands so on a number of occasions  and she hadn t seen him do more than that  though it was quite plain to her that in so doing he controlled the ship .   on occasion  fallom had seen trevize close his eyes  and she closed hers now .  after a moment or two  it was almost as though she heard a faint  far off voice far off  but sounding in her own head  through  she dimly realized  her transducer lobes .  they were even more important than her hands .  she strained to make out the words .   instructions  it said  almost pleadingly .  what are your instructions .   fallom didn t say anything .  she had never witnessed trevize saying anything to the computer but she knew what it was that she wanted with all her heart .  she wanted to go back to solaria  to the comforting endlessness of the mansion  to jemby jemby jemby   she wanted to go there and  as she thought of the world she loved  she imagined it visible on the viewscreen as she had seen other worlds she didn t want .  she opened her eyes and stared at the viewscreen willing some other world there than this hateful earth  then staring at what she saw  imagining it to be solaria .  she hated the empty galaxy to which she had been introduced against her will .  tears came to her eyes  and the ship trembled .   she could feel that tremble  and she swayed a little in response .   and then she heard loud steps in the corridor outside and  when she opened her eyes  trevize s face  distorted  filled her vision  blocking out the viewscreen  which held all she wanted .  he was shouting something  but she paid no attention .  it was he who had taken her from solaria by killing bander  and it was he who was preventing her from returning by thinking only of earth  and she was not going to listen to him .   she was going to take the ship to solaria  and  with the intensity of her resolve  it trembled again .      .   bliss clutched wildly at trevize s arm .   don t .  don t .    she clung strongly  holding him back  while pelorat stood  confused and frozen  in the background .   trevize was shouting   take your hands off the computer .   bliss  don t get in my way .  i don t want to hurt you .    bliss said  in a tone that seemed almost exhausted   don t offer violence to the child .  i d have to hurt you against all instructions .    trevize s eyes darted wildly from fallom to bliss .  he said   then you get her off  bliss .  now .    bliss pushed him away with surprising strength  drawing it  trevize thought afterward  from gaia  perhaps  .    fallom   she said   lift your hands .     no   shrieked fallom .   i want the ship to go to solaria .  i want it to go there .  there .   she nodded toward the viewscreen with her head  unwilling to let even one hand release its pressure on the desk for the purpose .   but bliss reached for the child s shoulders and  as her hands touched fallom  the youngster began to tremble .   bliss s voice grew soft .   now  fallom  tell the computer to be as it was and come with me .  come with me .   her hands stroked the child  who collapsed in an agony of weeping .   fallom s hands left the desk  and bliss  catching her under the armpits  lifted her into a standing position .  she turned her  held her firmly against her breast  and allowed the child to smother her wrenching sobs there .   bliss said to trevize  who was now standing dumbly in the doorway   step out of the way  trevize  and don t touch either of us as we pass .    trevize stepped quickly to one side .   bliss paused a moment  saying in a low voice to trevize   i had to get into her mind for a moment .  if i ve caused any damage  i won t forgive you easily .    it was trevize s impulse to tell her he didn t care a cubic millimeter of vacuum for fallom s mind  that it was the computer for which he feared .  against the concentrated glare of gaia  however  surely it wasn t only bliss whose sole expression could inspire the moment of cold terror he felt   he kept silent .   he remained silent for a perceptible period  and motionless as well  after bliss and fallom had disappeared into their room .  he remained so  in fact  until pelorat said softly   golan  are you all right .  she didn t hurt you  did she .    trevize shook his head vigorously  as though to shake off the touch of paralysis that had afflicted him .   i m all right .  the real question is whether that s all right .   he sat down at the computer console  his hands resting on the two handmarks which fallom s hands had so recently covered .    well .   said pelorat anxiously .   trevize shrugged .   it seems to respond normally .  i might conceivably find something wrong later on  but there s nothing that seems off now .   then  more angrily   the computer should not combine effectively with any hands other than mine  but in that hermaphrodite s case  it wasn t the hands alone .  it was the transducer lobes  i m sure     but what made the ship shake .  it shouldn t do that  should it .     no .  it s a gravitic ship and we shouldn t have these inertial effects .  but that she monster   he paused  looking angry again .    yes .     i suspect she faced the computer with two self contradictory demands  and each with such force that the computer had no choice but to attempt to do both things at once .  in the attempt to do the impossible  the computer must have released the inertia free condition of the ship momentarily .  at least that s what i think happened .    and then  somehow  his face smoothed out .   and that might be a good thing  too  for it occurs to me now that all my talk about alpha centauri and its companion was flapdoodle .  i know now where earth must have transferred its secret .       .   pelorat stared  then ignored the final remark and went back to an earlier puzzle .   in what way did fallom ask for two self contradictory things .     well  she said she wanted the ship to go to solaria .     yes .  of course  she would .     but what did she mean by solaria .  she can t recognize solaria from space .  she s never really seen it from space .  she was asleep when we left that world in a hurry .  and despite her readings in your library  together with whatever bliss has told her  i imagine she can t really grasp the truth of a galaxy of hundreds of billions of stars and millions of populated planets .  brought up  as she was  underground and alone  it is all she can do to grasp the bare concept that there are different worlds but how many .  two .  three .  four .  to her any world she sees is likely to be solaria  and given the strength of her wishful thinking  is solaria .  and since i presume bliss has tried to quiet her by hinting that if we don t find earth  we ll take her back to solaria  she may even have worked up the notion that solaria is close to earth .     but how can you tell this  golan .  what makes you think it s so .     she as much as told us so  janov  when we burst in upon her .  she cried out that she wanted to go to solaria and then added  there there   nodding her head at the viewscreen .  and what is on the viewscreen .  earth s satellite .  it wasn t there when i left the machine before dinner  earth was .  but fallom must have pictured the satellite in her mind when she asked for solaria  and the computer  in response  must therefore have focused on the satellite .  believe me  janov  i know how this computer works .  who would know better .    pelorat looked at the thick crescent of light on the viewscreen and said thoughtfully   it was called  moon  in at least one of earth s languages   luna   in another language .  probably many other names  too .   imagine the confusion  old chap  on a world with numerous languages the misunderstandings  the complications  the     moon .   said trevize .   well  that s simple enough .   then  too  come to think of it  it may be that the child tried  instinctively  to move the ship by means of its transducer lobes  using the ship s own energy source  and that may have helped produce the momentary inertial confusion .   but none of that matters  janov .  what does matter is that all this has brought this moon  yes  i like the name to the screen and magnified it  and there it still is .  i m looking at it now  and wondering .     wondering what  golan .     at the size of it .  we tend to ignore satellites  janov .  they re such little things  when they exist at all .  this one is different  though .  it s a world .  it has a diameter of about thirty five hundred kilometers .     a world .  surely you wouldn t call it a world .  it can t be habitable .  even a thirty five hundred kilometer diameter is too small .  it has no atmosphere .  i can tell that just looking at it .  no clouds .  the circular curve against space is sharp  so is the inner curve that bounds the light and dark hemisphere .    trevize nodded   you re getting to be a seasoned space traveler  janov .  you re right .  no air .  no water .  but that only means the moon s not habitable on its unprotected surface .  what about underground .     underground .   said pelorat doubtfully .    yes .  underground .  why not .  earth s cities were underground  you tell me .  we know that trantor was underground .  comporellon has much of its capital city underground .  the solarian mansions were almost entirely underground .  it s a very common state of affairs .     but  golan  in every one of these cases  people were living on a habitable planet .  the surface was habitable  too  with an atmosphere and with an ocean .  is it possible to live underground when the surface is uninhabitable .       come  janov  think .  where are we living right now .  the far star is a tiny world that has an uninhabitable surface .  there s no air or water on the outside .  yet we live inside in perfect comfort .  the galaxy is full of space stations and space settlements of infinite variety  to say nothing of spaceships  and they re all uninhabitable except for the interior .  consider the moon a gigantic spaceship .     with a crew inside .     yes .  millions of people  for all we .  know  and plants and animals  and an advanced technology .   look  janov  doesn t it make sense .  if earth  in its last days  could send out a party of settlers to a planet orbiting alpha centauri  and if  possibly with imperial help  they could attempt to terraform it  seed its oceans  build dry land where there was none  could earth not also send a party to its satellite and terraform its interior .    pelorat said reluctantly   i suppose so .     it would be done .  if earth has something to hide  why send it over a parsec away  when it could be hidden on a world less than a hundred millionth the distance to alpha .  and the moon would be a more efficient hiding place from the psychological standpoint .  no one would think of satellites in connection with life .  for that matter i didn t .  with the moon an inch before my nose  my thoughts went haring off to alpha .  if it hadn t been for fallom   his lips tightened  and he shook his head .   i suppose i ll have to credit her for that .  bliss surely will if i don t .    pelorat said   but see here  old man  if there s something hiding under the surface of the moon  how do we find it .  there must be millions of square kilometers of surface     roughly forty million .     and we would have to inspect all of that  looking for what .  an opening .  some sort of airlock .    trevize said   put that way  it would seem rather a task  but we re not just looking for objects  we re looking for life  and for intelligent life at that .  and we ve got bliss  and detecting intelligence is her talent  isn t it .       .   bliss looked at trevize accusingly .   i ve finally got her to sleep .  i had the hardest time .  she was wild .  fortunately  i don t think i ve damaged her .    trevize said coldly   you might try removing her fixation on jemby  you know  since i certainly have no intention of ever going back to solaria .     just remove her fixation  is that it .  what do you know about such things  trevize .  you ve never sensed a mind .  you haven t the faintest idea of its complexity .  if you knew anything at all about it  you wouldn t talk about removing a fixation as though it were just a matter of scooping jam out of a jar .     well  weaken it at least .     i might weaken it a bit  after a month of careful dethreading .     what do you mean  dethreading .     to someone who doesn t know  it can t be explained .     what are you going to do with the child  then .     i don t know yet  it will take a lot of consideration .     in that case   said trevize   let me tell you what we re going to do with the ship .     i know what you re going to do .  it s back to new earth and another try at the lovely hiroko  if she ll promise not to infect you this time .    trevize kept his face expressionless .  he said   no  as a matter of fact .  i ve changed my mind .  we re going to the moon which is the name of the satellite  according to janov .     the satellite .  because it s the nearest world at hand .  i hadn t thought of that .     nor i .  nor would anyone have thought of it .  nowhere in the galaxy is there a satellite worth thinking about but this satellite  in being large  is unique .  what s more  earth s anonymity covers it as well .  anyone who can t find the earth can t find the moon  either .     is it habitable .     not on the surface  but it is not radioactive  not at all  so it isn t absolutely uninhabitable .  it may have life it may be teeming with life  in fact under the surface .  and  of course  you ll be able to tell if that s so  once we get close enough .    bliss shrugged .   i ll try .   but  then  what made you suddenly think of trying the satellite .    trevize said quietly   something fallom did when she was at the controls .    bliss waited  as though expecting more  then shrugged again .   whatever it was  i suspect you wouldn t have gotten the inspiration if you had followed your own impulse and killed her .     i had no intention of killing her  bliss .    bliss waved her hand .   all right .  let it be .  are we moving toward the moon now .     yes .  as a matter of caution  i m not going too fast  but if all goes well  we ll be in its vicinity in thirty hours .       .   the moon was a wasteland .  trevize watched the bright daylit portion drifting past them below .  it was a monotonous panorama of crater rings and mountainous areas  and of shadows black against the sunlight .  there were subtle color changes in the soil and occasional sizable stretches of flatness  broken by small craters .   as they approached the nightside  the shadows grew longer and finally fused together .  for a while  behind them  peaks glittered in the sun  like fat stars  far outshining their brethren in the sky .  then they disappeared and below was only the fainter light of the earth in the sky  a large bluish white sphere  a little more than half full .  the ship finally outran the earth  too  which sank beneath the horizon so that under them was unrelieved blackness  and above only the faint powdering of stars  which  to trevize  who had been brought up on the starless world of terminus  was always miracle enough .   then  new bright stars appeared ahead  first just one or two  then others  expanding and thickening and finally coalescing .  and at once they passed the terminator into the daylit side .  the sun rose with infernal splendor  while the viewscreen shifted away from it at once and polarized the glare of the ground beneath .   trevize could see quite well that it was useless to hope to find any way into the inhabited interior  if that existed  by mere eye inspection of this perfectly enormous world .   he turned to look at bliss  who sat beside him .  she did not look at the viewscreen  indeed  she kept her eyes closed .  she seemed to have collapsed into the chair rather than to be sitting in it .   trevize  wondering if she were asleep  said softly   do  you detect anything else .    bliss shook her head very slightly .   no   she whispered .   there was just that faint whiff .  you d better take me back there .  do you know where that region was .     the computer knows .    it was like zeroing in on a target  shifting this way and that and then finding it .  the area in question was still deep in the nightside and  except that the earth shone fairly low in the sky and gave the surface a ghostly ashen glow between the shadows  there was nothing to make out  even though the light in the pilot room had been blacked out for better viewing .   pelorat had approached and was standing anxiously in the doorway .   have we found anything .   .  he asked  in a husky whisper .   trevize held up his hand for silence .  he was watching bliss .  he knew it would be days before sunlight would return to this spot on the moon  but he also knew that for what bliss was trying to sense  light of any kind was irrelevant .   she said   it s there .     are you sure .     yes .     and it s the only spot .     it s the only spot i ve detected .  have you been over every part of the moon s surface .     we ve been over a respectable fraction of it .     well  then  in that respectable fraction  this is all i have detected .  it s stronger now  as though it has detected us and it doesn t seem dangerous .  the feeling i get is a welcoming one .     are you sure .     it s the feeling i get .    pelorat said   could it be faking the feeling .    bliss said  with a trace of hauteur   i would detect a fake  i assure you .    trevize muttered something about overconfidence  then said   what you detect is intelligence  i hope .     i detect strong intelligence .  except   and an odd note entered her voice .    except what .     ssh .  don t disturb me .  let me concentrate .   the last word was a mere motion of her lips .   then she said  in faint elated surprise   it s not human .     not human   said trevize  in much stronger surprise .   are we dealing with robots again .  as on solaria .     no .   bliss was smiling .   it s not quite robotic  either .     it has to be one or the other .     neither .   she actually chuckled .   it s not human  and yet it s not like any robot i ve detected before .    pelorat said   i would like to see that .   he nodded his head vigorously  his eyes wide with pleasure .   it would be exciting .  something new .     something new   muttered trevize with a sudden lift of his own spirits and a flash of unexpected insight seemed to illuminate the interior of his skull .       .   down they sank to the moon s surface  in what was almost jubilation .  even fallom had joined them now and  with the abandonment of a youngster  was hugging herself with unbearable joy as though she were truly returning to solaria .   as for trevize  he felt within himself a touch of sanity telling him that it was strange that earth or whatever of earth was on the moon which had taken such measures to keep off all others  should now be taking measures to draw them in .  could the purpose be the same in either way .  was it a case of  if you can t make them avoid you  draw them in and destroy them .   either way  would not earth s secret remain untouched .   but that thought faded and drowned in the flood of joy that deepened steadily as they came closer to the moon s surface .  yet over and beyond that  he managed to cling to the moment of illumination that had reached him just before they had begun their gliding dive to the surface of the earth s satellite .   he seemed to have no doubt as to where the ship was going .  they were just above the tops of the rolling hills now  and trevize  at the computer  felt no need to do anything .  it was as though he and the computer  both  were being guided  and he felt only an enormous euphoria at having the weight of responsibility taken away from him .   they were sliding parallel to the ground  toward a cliff that raised its menacing height as a barrier against them  a barrier glistening faintly in earth shine and in the light beam of the far star .  the approach of certain collision seemed to mean nothing to trevize  and it was with no surprise whatever that he became aware that the section of cliff directly ahead had fallen away and that a corridor  gleaming in artificial light  had opened before them .   the ship slowed to a crawl  apparently of its own accord  and fitted neatly into the opening  entering sliding along  the opening closed behind it  and another then opened before it .  through the second opening went the ship  into a gigantic hall that seemed the hollowed interior of a mountain .   the ship halted and all aboard rushed to the airlock eagerly .  it occurred to none of them  not even to trevize  to check .  whether there might be a breathable atmosphere outside or any atmosphere at all .   there was air  however .  it was breathable and it was comfortable .  they looked about themselves with the pleased air of people who had somehow come home and it was only after a while that they became aware of a man who was waiting politely for them to approach .   he was tall  and his expression was grave .  his hair was bronze in color  and cut short .  his cheekbones were broad  his eyes were bright  and his clothing was rather after the fashion one saw in ancient history books .  although he seemed sturdy and vigorous there was  just the same  an air of weariness about him not in anything that one could see  but rather in something appealing to no recognizable sense .   it was fallom who reacted first .  with a loud  whistling scream  she ran toward the man  waving her arms and crying   jemby .  jemby .   in a breathless fashion .   she never slackened her pace  and when she was close enough  the man stooped and lifted her high in the air .  she threw her arms about his neck  sobbing  and still gasping   jemby .    the others approached more soberly and trevize said  slowly and distinctly  could this man understand galactic .     we ask pardon  sir .  this child has lost her protector and is searching for it desperately .  how it came to fasten on you is a puzzle to us  since it is seeking a robot  a mechanical    the man spoke for the first time .  his voice was utilitarian rather than musical  and there was a faint air of archaism clinging to it  but he spoke galactic with perfect ease .    i greet you all in friendship   he said and he seemed unmistakably friendly  even though his face continued to remain fixed in its expression of gravity .   as for this child   he went on   she shows perhaps a greater perceptivity than you think  for i am a robot .  my name is daneel olivaw .      chapter       the search ends        .     trevize found himself in a complete state of disbelief .  he had recovered from the odd euphoria he had felt just before and after the landing on the moon a euphoria  he now suspected  that had been imposed on him by this self styled robot who now stood before him .   trevize was still staring  and in his now perfectly sane and untouched mind  he remained lost in astonishment .  he had talked in astonishment  made conversation in astonishment  scarcely understood what he said or heard as he searched for something in the appearance of this apparent man  in his behavior  in his manner of speaking  that bespoke the robot .   no wonder  thought trevize  that bliss had detected something that was neither human nor robot  but  that was  in pelorat s words   something new .   just as well  of course  for it had turned trevize s thoughts into another and more enlightening channel but even that was now crowded into the back of his mind .   bliss and fallom had wandered off to explore the grounds .  it had been bliss s suggestion  but it seemed to trevize that it came after a lightning quick glance had been exchanged between herself and daneel .  when fallom refused and asked to stay with the being she persisted in calling jemby  a grave word from daneel and a lift of the finger was enough to cause her to trot off at once .  trevize and pelorat remained .    they are not foundationers  sirs   said the robot  as though that explained it all .   one is gaia and one is a spacer .    trevize remained silent while they were led to simply designed chairs under a tree .  they seated themselves  at a gesture from the robot  and when he sat down  too  in a perfectly human movement  trevize said   are you truly a robot .     truly  sir   said daneel .   pelorat s face seemed to shine with joy .  he said   there are references to a robot named daneel in the old legends .  are you named in his honor .     i am that robot   said daneel .   it is not a legend .     oh no   said pelorat .   if you are that robot  you would have to be thousands of years old .     twenty thousand   said daneel quietly .   pelorat seemed abashed at that  and glanced at trevize  who said  with a touch of anger   if you are a robot  i order you to speak truthfully .     i do not need to be told to speak truthfully  sir .  i must do so .  you are faced then  sir  with three alternatives .  either i am a man who is lying to you  or i am a robot who has been programmed to believe that it is twenty thousand years old but  in fact  is not  or i am a robot who is twenty thousand years old .  you must decide which alternative to accept .     the matter may decide itself with continued conversation   said trevize dryly .   for that matter  it is hard to believe that this is the interior of the moon .  neither the light  he looked up as he said that  for the light was precisely that of soft  diffuse sunlight  though no sun was in the sky  and  for that matter  no sky was clearly visible  nor the gravity seems credible .  this world should have a surface gravity of less than   .  g .     the normal surface gravity would be   .   g actually  sir .  it is built up  however  by the same forces that give you  on your ship  the sensation of normal gravity  even when you are in free fall  or under acceleration .  other energy needs  including the light  are also met gravitically  though we use solar energy where that is convenient .  our material needs are all supplied by the moon s soil  except for the light elements hydrogen  carbon  and nitrogen which the moon does not possess .  we obtain those by capturing an occasional comet .  one such capture a century is more than enough to supply our needs .     i take it earth is useless as a source of supply .     unfortunately  that is so  sir .  our positronic brains are as sensitive to radioactivity as human proteins are .     you use the plural  and this mansion before us seems  large  beautiful  and elaborate at least as seen from the outside .  there are then other beings on the moon .  humans .  robots .     yes  sir .  we have a complete ecology on the moon and a vast and complex hollow within which that ecology exists .  the intelligent beings are all robots  however  more or less like myself .  you will see none of them  however .  as for this mansion  it is used by myself only and it is an establishment that is modeled exactly on one i used to live in twenty thousand years ago .     which you remember in detail  do you .    .    perfectly  sir .  i was manufactured  and existed for a time how brief a time it seems to me  now on the spacer world of aurora .     the one with the   trevize paused .    yes  sir .  the one with the dogs .     you know about that .     yes  sir .     how do you come to be here  then  if you lived at first on aurora .     sir  it was to prevent the creation of a radioactive earth that i came here in the very beginnings of the settlement of the galaxy .  there was another robot with me  named giskard  who could sense and adjust minds .     as bliss can .     yes  sir .  we failed  in a way  and giskard ceased to operate .  before the cessation  however  he made it possible for me to have his talent and left it to me to care for the galaxy  for earth  particularly .     why earth  particularly .     in part because of a man named elijah baley  an earthman .    pelorat put in excitedly   he is the culture hero i mentioned some time ago  golan .     a culture hero  sir .     what dr .  pelorat means   said trevize   is that he is a person to whom much was attributed  and who may have been an amalgamation of many men in actual history  or who may be an invented person altogether .    daneel considered for a moment  and then said  quite calmly   that is not so  sirs .  elijah baley was a real man and he was one man .  i do not know what your legends say of him  but in actual history  the galaxy might never have been settled without him .  in his honor  i did my best to salvage what i could of earth after it began to turn radioactive .  my fellow robots were distributed over the galaxy in an effort to influence a person here a person there .  at one time i maneuvered a beginning to the recycling of earth s soil .  at another much later time  i maneuvered a beginning to the terraforming of a world circling the nearby star  now called alpha .  in neither case was i truly successful .  i could never adjust human minds entirely as i wished  for there was always the chance that i might do harm to the various humans who were adjusted .  i was bound  you see and am bound to this day by the laws of robotics .     yes .    it did not necessarily take a being with daneel s mental power to detect uncertainty in that monosyllable .    the first law   he said   is this  sir   a robot may not injure a human being or  through inaction  allow a human being to come to harm .   the second law   a robot must obey the orders given it by human beings except where such orders would conflict with the first law .   the third law   a robot must protect its own existence  as long as such protection does not conflict with the first or second law .   naturally  i give you these laws in the approximation of language .  in actual fact they represent complicated mathematical configurations of our positronic brain paths .     do you find it difficult to deal with those laws .     i must  sir .  the first law is an absolute that almost forbids the use of my mental talents altogether .  when dealing with the galaxy it is not likely that any course of action will prevent harm altogether .  always  some people  perhaps many people  will suffer so that a robot must choose minimum harm .  yet  the complexity of possibilities is such that it takes time to make that choice and one is  even then  never certain .     i see that   said trevize .    all through galactic history   said daneel   i tried to ameliorate the worst aspects of the strife and disaster that perpetually made itself felt in the galaxy .  i may have succeeded  on occasion  and to some extent  but if you know your galactic history  you will know that i did not succeed often  or by much .     that much i know   said trevize  with a wry smile .    just before giskard s end  he conceived of a robotic law that superseded even the first .  we called it the  zeroth law  out of an inability to think of any other name that made sense .  the zeroth law is   a robot may not injure humanity or  through inaction  allow humanity to come to harm .   this automatically means that the first law must be modified to be   a robot may not injure a human being  or  through inaction  allow a human being to come to harm  except where that would conflict with the zeroth law .   and similar modifications must be made in the second and third laws .    trevize frowned .   how do you decide what is injurious  or not injurious  to humanity as a whole .     precisely  sir   said daneel .   in theory  the zeroth law was the answer to our problems .  in practice  we could never decide .  a human being is a concrete object .  injury to a person can be estimated and judged .  humanity is an abstraction .  how do we deal with it .     i don t know   said trevize .    wait   said pelorat .   you could convert humanity into a single organism .  gaia .     that is what i tried to do  sir .  i engineered the founding of gaia .  if humanity could be made a single organism  it would become a concrete object  and it could be dealt with .  it was  however  not as easy to create a superorganism as i had hoped .  in the first place  it could not be done unless human beings valued the superorganism more than their individuality  and i had to find a mind cast that would allow that .  it was a long time before i thought of the laws of robotics .     ah  then  the gaians are robots .  i had suspected that from the start .     in that case  you suspected incorrectly  sir .  they are human beings  but they have brains firmly inculcated with the equivalent of the laws of robotics .  they have to value life  really value it .   and even after that was done  there remained a serious flaw .  a superorganism consisting of human beings only is unstable .  it cannot be set up .  other animals must be added then plants then the inorganic world .  the smallest superorganism that is truly stable is an entire world  and a world large enough and complex enough to have a stable ecology .  it took a long time to understand this  and it is only in this last century that gaia was fully established and that it became ready to move on toward galaxia and  even so  that will take a long time  too .  perhaps not as long as the road already traveled  however  since we now know the rules .     but you needed me to make the decision for you .  is that it  daneel .     yes  sir .  the laws of robotics would not allow me  nor gaia  to make the decision and chance harm to humanity .  and meanwhile  five centuries ago  when  t seemed that i would never work out methods for getting round all the difficulties that stood in the way of establishing gaia  i turned to the second best and helped bring about the development of the science of psychohistory .     i might have guessed that   mumbled trevize .   you know  daneel  i m beginning to believe you are twenty thousand years old .     thank you  sir .    pelorat said   wait a while .  i think i see something .  are you part of gaia yourself  daneel .  would that be how you knew about the dogs on aurora .  through bliss .    daneel said   in a way  sir  you are correct .  i am associated with gaia  though i am not part of it .    trevize s eyebrows went up .   that sounds like comporellon  the world we visited immediately after leaving gaia .  it insists it is not part of the foundation confederation  but is only associated with it .    slowly  daneel nodded .   i suppose that analogy is apt  sir .  i can  as an associate of gaia  make myself aware of what gaia is aware of in the person of the woman  bliss  for instance .  gaia  however  cannot make itself aware of what i am aware of  so that i maintain my freedom of action .  that freedom of action is necessary until galaxia is well established .    trevize looked steadily at the robot for a moment  then said   and did you use your awareness through bliss in order to interfere with events on our journey to mold them to your better liking .    daneel sighed in a curiously human fashion .   i could not do much  sir .  the laws of robotics always hold me back .   and yet  i lightened the load on bliss s mind  taking a small amount of added responsibility on myself  so that she might deal with the wolves of aurora and the spacer on solaria with greater dispatch and with less harm to herself .  in addition  i influenced the woman on comporellon and the one on new earth  through bliss  in order to have them look with favor on you  so that you might continue on your journey .    trevize smiled  half sadly .   i ought to have known it wasn t l   daneel accepted the statement without its rueful self deprecation .   on the contrary  sir   he said   it was you in considerable part .  each of the two women looked with favor upon you from the start .  i merely strengthened the impulse already present about all one can safely do under the strictures of the laws of robotics .  because of those strictures and for other reasons as well it was only with great difficulty that i brought you here  and only indirectly .  i was in great danger at several points of losing you .     and now i am here   said trevize .   what is it you want of me .  to confirm my decision in favor of galaxia .    daneel s face  always expressionless  somehow managed to seem despairing .   no  sir .  the mere decision is no longer enough .  i brought you here  as best i could in my present condition  for something far more desperate .  i am dying .        .   perhaps it was because of the matter of fact way in which daneel said it  or perhaps because a lifetime of twenty thousand years made death seem no tragedy to one doomed to live less than half a percent of that period  but  in any case  trevize felt no stir of sympathy .    die .  can a machine die .     i can cease to exist  sir .  call it by whatever word you wish .  i am old .  not one sentient being in the galaxy that was alive when i was first given consciousness is still alive today  nothing organic  nothing robotic .  even i myself lack continuity .     in what way .     there is no physical part of my body  sir  that has escaped replacement  not only once but many times .  even my positronic brain has been replaced on five different occasions .  each time the contents of my earlier brain were etched into the newer one to the last positron .  each time  the new brain had a greater capacity and complexity than the old  so that there was room for more memories  and for faster decision and action .  but     but .     the more advanced and complex the brain  the more unstable it is  and the more quickly it deteriorates .  my present brain is a hundred thousand times as sensitive as my first  and has ten million times the capacity  but whereas my first brain endured for over ten thousand years  the present one is but six hundred years old and is unmistakably senescent .  with every memory of twenty thousand years perfectly recorded and with a perfect recall mechanism in place  the brain is filled .  there is a rapidly declining ability to reach decisions  an even more rapidly declining ability to test and influence minds at hyperspatial distances .  nor can i design a sixth brain .  further miniaturization will run against the blank wall of the uncertainty principle  and further complexity will but assure decay almost at once .    pelorat seemed desperately troubled .   but surely  daneel  gaia can carry on without you .  now that trevize has judged and selected galaxia     the process simply took too long  sir   said daneel  as always betraying no emotion .   i had to wait for gaia to be fully established  despite the unanticipated difficulties that arose .  by the time a human being mr .  trevize was located who was capable of making the key decision  it was too late .  do not think  however  that i took no measure to lengthen my life span .  little by little i have reduced my activities  in order to conserve what i could for emergencies .  when i could no longer rely on active measures to preserve the  isolation of the earth moon system  i adopted passive ones .  over a period of years  the humaniform robots that have been working with me have been  one by one  called home .  their last tasks have been to remove all references to earth in the planetary archives .  and without myself and my fellow robots in full play  gaia will lack the essential tools to carry through the development of galaxia in less than an inordinate period of time .     and you knew all this   said trevize   when i made my decision .     a substantial time before  sir   said daneel .   gaia  of course  did not know .     but then   said trevize angrily   what was the use of carrying through the charade .  what good has it been .  ever since my decision  i have scoured the galaxy  searching for earth and what i thought of as its  secret  not knowing the secret was you in order that i might confirm the decision .  well  i have confirmed it .  i know now that galaxia is absolutely essential and it appears to be all for nothing .  why could you not have left the galaxy to itself  and me to myself .    daneel said   because  sir  i have been searching for a way out  and i have been carrying on in the hope that i might find one .  i think i have .  instead of replacing my brain with yet another positronic one  which is impractical  i might merge it with a human brain instead  a human brain that is not affected by the three laws  and will not only add capacity to my brain  but add a whole new level of abilities as well .  that is why i have brought you here .    trevize looked appalled .   you mean you plan to merge a human brain into yours .  have the human brain lose its individuality so that you can achieve a two brain gaia .     yes  sir .  it would not make me immortal  but it might enable me to live long enough to establish galaxia .     and you brought me here for that .  you want my independence of the three laws and my sense of judgment made part of you at the price of my individuality .   no .    daneel said   yet you said a moment ago that galaxia is essential for the welfare of the human     even if it is  it would take a long time to establish  and i would remain an individual in my lifetime .  on the other hand  if it were established rapidly  there would be a galactic loss of individuality and my own loss would be part of an unimaginably greater whole .  i would  however  certainly never consent to lose my individuality while the rest of the galaxy retains theirs .    daneel said   it is  then  as i thought .  your brain would not merge well and  in any case  it would serve a better purpose if you retained an independent judgmental ability .     when did you change your mind .  you said that it was for merging that you brought me here .     yes  and only by using the fullest extent of my greatly diminished powers .  still  when i said   that is why i have brought you here   please remember that in galactic standard  the word  you  represents the plural as well as the singular .  i was referring to all of you .    pelorat stiffened in his seat .   indeed .  tell me then  daneel  would a human brain that was merged with your brain share in all your memories all twenty thousand years of it  back to legendary times .     certainly  sir .    pelorat drew a long breath .   that would fulfill a lifetime search  and it is something i would gladly give up my individuality for .  please let me have the privilege of sharing your brain .    trevize asked softly   and bliss .  what about her .    pelorat hesitated for no more than a moment .   bliss will understand   he said .   she will  in any case  be better off without me after a while .    daneel shook his head .   your offer  dr .  pelorat  is a generous one  but i cannot accept it .  your brain is an old one and it cannot survive for more than two or three decades at best  even in a merger with my own .  i need something else .   see .   he pointed and said   i ve called her back .    bliss was returning  walking happily  with a bounce to her steps .   pelorat rose convulsively to his feet .   bliss .  oh no .     do not be alarmed  dr .  pelorat   said daneel .   i cannot use bliss .  that would merge me with gaia  and i must remain independent of gaia  as i have already explained .     but in that case   said pelorat   who    and trevize  looking at the slim figure running after bliss  said   the robot has wanted fallom all along  janov .        .   brass returned  smiling  clearly in a state of great pleasure .    we couldn t pass beyond the bounds of the estate   she said   but it all reminded me very much of solaria .  fallom  of course  is convinced it is solaria .  i asked her if she didn t think that daneel had an appearance different from that of jemby after all  jemby was metallic and fallom said   no  not really .   i don t know what she meant by  not really .     she looked across to the middle distance where fallom was now playing her flute for a grave daneel  whose head nodded in time .  the sound reached them  thin  clear  and lovely .    did you know she took the flute with her when we left the ship .   asked bliss .   i suspect we won t be able to get her away from daneel for quite a while .    the remark was met with a heavy silence  and bliss looked at the two men in quick alarm .   what s the matter .    trevize gestured gently in pelorat s direction .  it was up to him  the gesture seemed to say .   pelorat cleared his throat and said   actually  bliss  i think that fallom will be staying with daneel permanently .     indeed .   bliss  frowning  made as though to walk in daneel s direction  but pelorat caught her arm .   bliss dear  you can t .  he s more powerful than gaia even now  and fallom must stay with him if galaxia is to come into existence .  let me explain and  golan  please correct me if i get anything wrong .    bliss listened to the account  her expression sinking into something close to despair .   trevize said  in an attempt at cool reason   you see how it is  bliss .  the child is a spacer and daneel was designed and put together by spacers .  the child was brought up by a robot and knew nothing else on an estate as empty as this one .  the child has transductive powers which daneel will need  and she will live for three or four centuries  which may be what is required for the construction of galaxia .    bliss said  her cheeks flushed and her eyes moist   i suppose that the robot maneuvered our trip to earth in such a way as to make us pass through solaria in order to pick up a child for his use .    trevize shrugged .   he may simply have taken advantage of the opportunity .  i don t think his powers are strong enough at the moment to make complete puppets of us at hyperspatial distances .     no .  it was purposeful .  he made certain that i would feel strongly attracted to the child so that i would take her with me  rather than leave her to be killed  that i would protect her even against you when you showed nothing but resentment and annoyance at her being with us .    trevize said   that might just as easily have been your gaian ethics  which daneel could have strengthened a bit  i suppose .  come  bliss  there s nothing to be gained .  suppose you could take fallom away .  where could you then take her that would make her as happy as she is here .  would you take her back to solaria where she would be killed quite pitilessly  to some crowded world where she would sicken and die  to gaia  where she would wear her heart out longing for jemby  on an endless voyage through the galaxy  where she would think that every world we came across was her solaria .  and would you find a substitute for daneel s use so that galaxia could be constructed .    bliss was sadly silent .   pelorat held out his hand to her  a bit timidly .   bliss   he said   i volunteered to have my brain fused with daneel s .  he wouldn t take it because he said i was too old .  i wish he had  if that would have saved fallom for you .    bliss took his hand and kissed it .   thank you  pel  but the price would be too high  even for fallom .   she took a deep breath  and tried to smile .   perhaps  when we get back to gaia  room will be found in the global organism for a child for me and i will place fallom in the syllables of its name .    and now daneel  as though aware that the matter was settled  was walking toward them  with fallom skipping along at his side .   the youngster broke into a run and reached them first .  she said to bliss   thank you  bliss  for taking me home to jemby again and for taking care of me while we were on the ship .  i shall always remember you .   then she flung herself at bliss and the two held each other tightly .    i hope you will always be happy   said bliss .   i will remember you  too  fallom dear   and released her with reluctance .   fallom turned to pelorat  and said   thank you  too  pel  for letting me read your book films .   then  without an additional word  and after a trace of hesitation  the thin  girlish hand was extended to trevize .  he took it for a moment  then let it go .    good luck  fallom   he muttered .   daneel said   i thank you all  sirs and madam  for what you have done  each in your own way .  you are free to go now  for your search is ended .  as for my own work  it will be ended  too  soon enough  and successfully now .    but bliss said   wait  we are not quite through .  we don t know yet whether trevize is still of the mind that the proper future for humanity is galaxia  as opposed to a vast conglomeration of isolates .    daneel said   he has already made that clear a while ago  madam .  he has decided in favor of galaxia .    bliss s lips tightened .   i d rather hear that from him .   which is it to be  trevize .    trevize said calmly   which do you want it to be  bliss .  if i decide against galaxia  you may get fallom back .    bliss said   i am gaia .  i must know your decision  and its reason  for the sake of the truth and nothing else .    daneel said   tell her  sir .  your mind  as gaia is aware  is untouched .    and trevize said   the decision is for galaxia .  there is no further doubt in my mind on that point .        .   bliss remained motionless for the time one might take to count to fifty at a moderate rate  as though she were allowing the information to reach all parts of gaia  and then she said   why .    trevize said   listen to me .  i knew from the start that there were two possible futures for humanity galaxia  or else the second empire of seldon s plan .  and it seemed to me that those two possible futures were mutually exclusive .  we couldn t have galaxia unless  for some reason  seldon s plan had some fundamental flaw in it .    unfortunately  i knew nothing about seldon s plan except for the two axioms on which it is based  one  that there be involved a large enough number of human beings to allow humanity to be treated statistically as a group of individuals interacting randomly  and second  that humanity not know the results of psychohistorical conclusions before the results are achieved .    since i had already decided in favor of galaxia  i felt i must be subliminally aware of flaws in seldon s plan  and those flaws could only be in the axioms  which were all i knew of the plan .  yet i could see nothing wrong with the axioms .  i strove  then  to find earth  feeling that earth could not be so thoroughly hidden for no purpose .  i had to find out what that purpose was .    i had no real reason to expect to find a solution once i found earth  but i was desperate and could think of nothing else to do .   and perhaps daneel s desire for a solarian child helped drive me .    in any case  we finally reached earth  and then the moon  and bliss detected daneel s mind  which he  of course  was deliberately reaching out to her .  she described that mind as neither quite human nor quite robotic .  in hindsight  that proved to make sense  for daneel s brain is far advanced beyond any robot that ever existed  and would not be sensed as simply robotic .  neither would it be sensed as human  however .  pelorat referred to it as  something new  and that served as a trigger for  something new  of my own  a new thought .    just as  long ago  daneel and his colleague worked out a fourth law of robotics that was more fundamental than the other three  so i could suddenly see a third basic axiom of psychohistory that was more fundamental than the other two  a third axiom so fundamental that no one ever bothered to mention it .    here it is .  the two known axioms deal with human beings  and they are based on the unspoken axiom that human beings are the only intelligent species in the galaxy  and therefore the only organisms whose actions are significant in the development of society and history .  that is the unstated axiom  that there is only one species of intelligence in the galaxy and that it is homo sapiens .  if there were  something  new   if there were other species of intelligence widely different in nature  then their behavior would not be described accurately by the mathematics of psychohistory and seldon s plan would have no meaning .  do you see .    trevize was almost shaking with the earnest desire to make himself understood .   do you see .   he repeated .   pelorat said   yes  i see  but as devil   s advocate  old chap     yes .  go on .     human beings are the only intelligences in the galaxy .     robots .   said bliss .   gain .    pelorat thought awhile  then said hesitantly    robots have played no significant role in human history since the disappearance of the spacers .  gaia has played no significant role until very recently .  robots are the creation of human beings  and gaia is the creation of robots and both robots and gala  insofar as they must be bound by the three laws  have no choice but to yield to human will .  despite the twenty thousand years daneel has labored  and the long development of gaia  a single word from golan trevize  a human being  would put an end to both those labors and that development .  it follows  then  that humanity is the only significant species of intelligence in the galaxy  and psychohistory  remains valid .     the only form of intelligence in the galaxy     repeated trevize slowly .   i agree .  yet we speak so much and so often of the galaxy that it is all but impossible for us to see that this is not enough .  the galaxy is not the universe .  there are other galaxies .    pelorat and bliss stirred uneasily .  daneel listened with benign gravity  his hand slowly stroking fallom s hair .   trevize said   listen to me again .  just outside the galaxy are the magellanic clouds  where no human ship has ever penetrated .  beyond that are other small galaxies  and not very far away is the giant andromeda galaxy  larger than our own .  beyond that are galaxies by the billions .    our own galaxy has developed only one species of an intelligence great enough to develop a technological society  but what do we know of the other galaxies .  ours may be atypical .  in some of the others perhaps even in allthere may be many competing intelligent species  struggling with each other  and each incomprehensible to us .  perhaps it is their mutual struggle that preoccupies them  but what if  in some galaxy  one species gains domination over the rest and then has time to consider the possibility of penetrating other galaxies .    hyperspatially  the galaxy is a point and so is all the universe .  we have not visited any other galaxy  and  as far as we know  no intelligent species from another galaxy has ever visited us but that state of affairs may end someday .  and if the invaders come  they are bound to find ways of turning some human beings against other human beings .  we have so long had only ourselves to fight that we are used to such internecine quarrels .  an invader that finds us divided against ourselves will dominate us all  or destroy us all .  the only true defense is to produce galaxia  which cannot be turned against itself and which can meet invaders with maximum power .    bliss said   the picture you paint is a frightening one .  will we have time to form galaxia .    trevize looked up  as though to penetrate the thick layer of moonrock that separated him from the surface and from space  as though to force himself to see those far distant galaxies  moving slowly through unimaginable vistas of space .   he said   in all human history  no other intelligence has impinged on us  to our knowledge .  this need only continue a few more centuries  perhaps little more than one ten thousandth of the time civilization has already existed  and we will be safe .  after all   and here trevize felt a sudden twinge of trouble  which he forced himself to disregard   it is not as though we had the enemy already here and among us .    and he did not look down to meet the brooding eyes of fallom hermaphroditic  transductive  different as they rested  unfathomably  on him .       