to the reader  kalgash is an alien world and it is not our intention to have you think that it is identical to earth  even though we depict its people as speaking a language that you can understand  and using terms that are familiar to you .  those words should be understood as mere equivalents of alien terms that is  a conventional set of equivalents of the same sort that a writer of novels uses when he has foreign characters speaking with each other in their own language but nevertheless transcribes their words in the language of the reader .  so when the people of kalgash speak of  miles   or  hands   or  cars   or  computers   they mean their own units of distance  their own grasping organs  their own ground transportation devices  their own information processing machines  etc .  the computers used on kalgash are not necessarily compatible with the ones used in new york or london or stockholm  and the  mile  that we use in this book is not necessarily the american unit of       feet .  but it seemed simpler and more desirable to use these familiar terms in describing events on this wholly alien world than it would have been to invent a long series of wholly kalgashian terms .  in other words  we could have told you that one of our characters paused to strap on his quonglishes before setting out on a walk of seven vorks along the main gleebish of his native znoob  and everything might have seemed ever so much more thoroughly alien .  but it would also have been ever so much more difficult to make sense out of what we were saying  and that did not seem useful .  the essence of this story doesn t lie in the quantity of bizarre terms we might have invented  it lies  rather  in the reaction of a group of people somewhat like ourselves  living on a world that is somewhat like ours in all but one highly significant detail  as they react to a challenging situation that is completely different from anything the people of earth have ever had to deal with .  under the circumstances  it seemed to us better to tell you that someone put on his hiking boots before setting out on a seven mile walk than to clutter the book with quonglishes  vorks  and gleebishes .  if you prefer  you can imagine that the text reads  vorks  wherever it says  miles    gliizbiiz  wherever it says  hours   and  sleshtraps  where it says  eyes .   or you can make up your own terms .  vorks or miles  it will make no difference when the stars come out .   i . a .   r . s .   if the stars should appear one night in a thousand years  bow would men believe and adore  and preserve for many generations the remembrance of the city of god .   emerson  other world .  there is no other world .  here or nowhere is the whole fact .   emerson  it was a dazzling four sun afternoon .  great golden onos was high in the west  and little red dovim was rising fast on the horizon below it .  when you looked the other way you saw the brilliant white points of trey and patru bright against the purplish eastern sky .  the rolling plains of kalgash s northernmost continent were flooded with wondrous light .  the office of kelaritan     director of the jonglor municipal psychiatric institute  had huge windows on every side to display the full magnificence of it all .  sheerin     of saro university  who had arrived in jonglor a few hours before at kelaritan s urgent request  wondered why he wasn t in a better mood .  sheerin was basically a cheerful person to begin with  and four sun days usually gave his normally ebullient spirits an additional lift .  but today  for some reason  he was edgy and apprehensive  although he was trying his best to keep that from becoming apparent .  he had been summoned to jonglor as an expert on mental health  after all .   would you like to start by talking with some of the victims .   kelaritan asked .  the director of the psychiatric hospital was a gaunt  angular little man  sallow and hollow chested .  sheerin  who was ruddy and very far from gaunt  was innately suspicious of anyone of adult years who weighed less than half of what he did .  perhaps it s the way kelaritan looks that s upsetting me  sheerin thought .  he s like a walking skeleton .   or do you think it s a better idea for you to get some personal experience of the tunnel of mystery first  dr .  sheerin .   sheerin managed a laugh  hoping it didn t sound too forced .   maybe i ought to begin by interviewing a victim or three   he said .   that way i might be able to prepare myself a little better for the horrors of the tunnel .   kelaritan s dark beady eyes flickered unhappily .  but it was cubello     the sleek and polished lawyer for the jonglor centennial exposition  who spoke out .   oh  come now  dr .  sheerin .   the horrors of the tunnel .   that s a little extreme  don t you think .  after all  you ve got nothing but newspaper accounts to go by  at this point .  and calling the patients  victims .   that s hardly what they are .    the term was dr .  kelaritan s   said sheerin stiffly .   i m sure dr .  kelaritan used that word only in the most general sense .  but there s a presupposition in its use that i find unacceptable .   sheerin said  giving the lawyer a look compounded equally of distaste and professional dispassion   i understand that several people died as a result of their journey through the tunnel of mystery .  is that not so .    there were several deaths in the tunnel  yes .  but there s no necessary reason at this point to think that those people died as a result of having gone through the tunnel  doctor .    i can see why you wouldn t want to think so  counselor   said sheerin crisply .  cubello looked in outrage toward the hospital director .   dr .  kelaritan .  if this is the way this inquiry is going to be conducted  i want to register a protest right now .  your dr .  sheerin is here as an impartial expert  not as a witness for the prosecution .   sheerin chuckled .   i was expressing my view of lawyers in general  counselor  not offering any opinion about what may or may not have happened in the tunnel of mystery .    dr .  kelaritan .   cubello exclaimed again  growing red faced .   gentlemen  please   kelaritan said  his eyes moving back and forth quickly from cubello to sheerin  from sheerin to cubello .   let s not be adversaries  shall we .  we all have the same objective in this inquiry  as i see it .  which is to discover the truth about what happened in the tunnel of mystery  so that a repetition of the ah unfortunate events can be avoided .    agreed   said sheerin amiably .  it was a waste of time to be sniping at the lawyer this way .  there were more important things to be doing .  he offered cubello a genial smile .   i m never really much interested in the placing of blame  only in working out ways of heading off situations where people come to feel that blame has to be placed .  suppose you show me one of your patients now  dr .  kelaritan .  and then we can have lunch and discuss the events in the tunnel as we understand them at this point  and perhaps after we ve eaten i might be able to see another patient or two    lunch .   kelaritan said vaguely  as though the concept was unfamiliar to him .   lunch  yes .  the midday meal .  an old habit of mine  doctor .  but i can wait just a little while longer .  we can certainly visit one of the patients first .   kelaritan nodded .  to the lawyer he said   harrim s the one to start with  i think .  he s in pretty good shape today .  good enough to withstand interrogation by a stranger  anyway .    what about gistin     .   cubello asked .   she s another possibility  but she s not as strong as harrim .  let him get the basic story from harrim  and then he can talk to gistin  and oh  maybe chimmilit .  after lunch  that is .    thank you   said sheerin .   if you ll come this way  dr .  sheerin   kelaritan gestured toward a glassed in passageway that led from the rear of his office to the hospital itself .  it was an airy  open catwalk with a     degree view of the sky and the low gray green hills that encircled the city of jonglor .  the light of the day s four suns came streaming in from all sides .  pausing for a moment  the hospital director looked to his right  then to his left  taking in the complete panorama .  the little man s dour pinched features seemed to glow with sudden youth and vitality as the warm rays of onos and the tighter  sharply contrasting beams from dovim  patru  and trey converged in a brilliant display .   what an absolutely splendid day  eh  gentlemen .   kelaritan cried  with an enthusiasm that sheerin found startling  coming from someone as restrained and austere as he seemed to be .   how glorious it is to see four of the suns in the sky at the same time .  how good it makes me feel when their light strikes my face .  ah  where would we be without our marvelous suns  i wonder .    indeed   said sheerin .  he was feeling a little better himself  as a matter of fact .   half a world away  one of sheerin     s saro university colleagues was staring at the sky also .  but the only emotion she felt was horror .  she was siferra     of the department of archaeology  who had been conducting excavations for the past year and a half at the ancient site of beklimot on the remote sagikan peninsula .  now she stood rigid with apprehension  watching a catastrophe come rushing toward her .    the sky offered no comfort .  in this part of the world the only real light visible just then was that of tano and sitha  and their cold  harsh gleam had always seemed joyless  even depressing  to her .  against the deep somber blue of the two sunday sky it was a baleful  oppressive illumination  casting jagged  ominous shadows .  dovim was in view also barely  just rising now right on the horizon  a short distance above the tips of the distant horkkan mountains .  the dim glow of the little red sun  though  was hardly any more cheering .  but siferra knew that the warm yellow light of onos would come drifting up out of the east before long to cheer things up .  what was troubling her was something far more serious than the temporary absence of the main sun .  a killer sandstorm was heading straight toward beklimot .  in another few minutes it would sweep over the site  and then anything might happen .  anything .  the tents could be destroyed  the carefully sorted trays of artifacts might be overturned and their contents scattered  their cameras  their drafting equipment  their laboriously compiled stratigraphic drawings everything that they had worked on for so long might be lost in a moment .  worse .  they could all be killed .  worse yet .  the ancient ruins of beklimot itself the cradle of civilization  the oldest known city on kalgash were in jeopardy .  the trial trenches that siferra had sliced in the surrounding alluvial plain stood wide open .  the onrushing wind  if it was strong enough  would lift even more sand than it was already carrying  and hurl it with terrible force against the fragile remains of beklimot scouring  eroding  reburying  perhaps even ripping whole foundations loose and hurling them across the parched plain .  beklimot was a historical treasure that belonged to the entire world .  that siferra had exposed it to possible harm by excavating in it had been a calculated risk .  you could never do any sort of archaeological work without destroying something  it was the nature of the job .  but to have laid the whole heart of the plain bare like this  and then to have the lousy luck of being hit by the worst sandstorm in a century  no .  no  it was too much .  her name would be blackened for aeons to come if the beklimot site was shattered by this storm as a result of what she had done here .  maybe there was a curse on this place  as certain superstitious people were known to say .  siferra    had never had much tolerance for crackpots of any sort .  but this dig  which she had hoped would be the crowning achievement of her career  had been nothing but headaches ever since she started .  and now it threatened to finish her professionally for the rest of her life  if it didn t kill her altogether .  eilis     one of her assistants  came running up .  he was a slight  wiry man who looked insignificant beside the tall  athletic figure of siferra .   we ve got everything nailed down that we were able to .   he called to her  half breathless .   it s all up to the gods now .   she replied  scowling   gods .  what gods .  do you see any gods around here  eilis .    i simply meant    i know what you meant .  forget it .   from the other side came thuvvik      the foreman of the workers .  he was wild eyed with fear .   lady   he said .   lady  where can we hide .  there is no place to hide .    i told you  thuvvik .  down below the cliff .    we will be buried .  we will be smothered .    the cliff will shelter you  don t worry   siferra told him  with a conviction she was far from feeling .   get over there .  and make sure everybody else stays there .    and you  lady .  why are you not there .   she gave him a sudden startled glance .  did he think she had some private hiding place where she d be safer than the rest .   i ll be there  thuvvik .  go on .  stop bothering me .   across the way  near the six sided brick building that the early explorers had called the temple of the suns  siferra caught sight of the stocky figure of balik     .  squinting  shading his eyes against the chilly light of tano and sitha  he stood looking toward the north  the direction from which the sandstorm was coming .  the expression on his face was one of anguish .  balik was their chief stratigrapher  but he was also the expedition s meteorological expert  more or less .  it was part of his job to keep the weather records for them andto watch out for the possibility of unusual events .  there wasn t much in the way of weather on the sagikan peninsula  normally  the whole place was unthinkably arid  with measurable rainfall no more often than every ten or twenty years .  the only unusual climatic event that ever occurred there was a shift in the prevailing pattern of air currents that set cyclonic forces in motion and brought about a sandstorm  and even that didn t happen more than a few times a century .  was balik s despondent expression a hint of the guilt he must feel for having failed to foresee the coming of the storm .  or did he look so horrified because he was able now to calculate the full extent of the fury that was about to descend .  everything might have been different  siferra told herself  if they d had a little more time to prepare for the onslaught .  in hindsight  she could see that all the telltale signs had been there for those with the wit to notice them the burst of fierce dry heat  excruciating even by the standards of the sagikan peninsula  and the sudden dead calm that replaced the usual steady breeze from the north  and then the strange moist wind that began to blow from the south .  the khalla birds  those weird scrawny scavengers that haunted the area like ghouls  had all taken wing when that wind started blowing  vanishing into the dune choked western desert as though demons were on their tails .  that should have been the clue  siferra thought .  when the khalla birds took off and went screaming into the dune country .  but they had all been too busy working at the dig to pay attention to what was going on .  sheer denial  most likely .  pretend that you don t notice the signs of an approaching sandstorm and maybe the sandstorm will go somewhere else .  and then that little gray cloud appearing out of nowhere in the far north  that dull stain on the fierce shield of the desert sky  which ordinarily was always as clear as glass  cloud .  do you see a cloud .  i don  t see any clouds .  denial again .  now the cloud was an immense black monster filling half the sky .  the wind still blew from the south  but it was no longer moist a searing furnace blast was what it was  now and there was another wind  an even stronger one  bearing down from the opposite direction .  one wind fed the other .  and when they met   siferra .   balik yelled .   here it comes .  take cover .    i will .  i will .   she didn t want to .  what she wanted to do was run from one zone of the dig to another  looking after everything at once  holding the flaps of the tents down  wrapping her arms around the bundles of precious photographic plates  throwing herself against the face of the newly excavated octagon house to protect the stunning mosaics that they had discovered the month before .  but balik was right .  siferra had done all she could  this frantic morning  to batten down the site .  now the thing to do was to huddle in  down there below the cliff that loomed at the upper edge of the site  and hope that it would be a bulwark for them against the fullest force of the storm .  she ran for it .  her sturdy  powerful legs carried her easily over the parched  crackling sand .  siferra was not quite forty years old  a tall  strong woman in the prime of her physical strength  and until this moment she had never felt anything but optimism about any aspect of her existence .  but suddenly everything was imperiled now  her academic career  her robust good health  maybe even her life itself .  the others were crowded together at the base of the cliff  behind a hastily improvised screen of bare wooden poles with tarpaulins lashed to them .   move over   siferra said  pushing her way in among them .   lady   thuvvik moaned .   lady  make the storm turn back .   as though she were some sort of goddess with magical powers .  siferra laughed harshly .  the foreman made some kind of gesture at her a holy sign  she imagined .  the other workers  all of them men of the little village just east of the ruins  made the same sign and began to mutter at her .  prayers .  to her .  it was a spooky moment .  these men  like their fathers and grandfathers  had been digging at beklimot all their lives in the employ of one archaeologist or another  patiently uncovering the ancient buildings and sifting through the sand for tiny artifacts .  presumably they had been through bad sandstorms before .  were they always this terrified .  or was this some kind of super storm .   here it is   balik said .   this is it .   and he covered his face with his hands .  the full power of the sandstorm broke over them .  siferra remained standing at first  staring through an opening in the tarpaulins at the monumental cyclopean city wall across the way  as though simply by keeping her gaze fixed on the site she would be able to spare it from harm .  but after a moment that became impossible .  gusts of incredible heat came sweeping down  so ferocious that she thought her hair and even her eyebrows would burst into flame .  she turned away  raising one arm to shield her face .  then came the sand  and all vision was blotted out .  it was like a rainstorm  a downpour of all too solid rain .  there was a tremendous thundering sound  not thunder at all but only the drumming of a myriad tiny sand particles against the ground .  within that great sound were other ones  a slithery whispering sound  a jagged scraping sound  a delicate drumming sound .  and a terrible howling .  siferra imagined tons of sand cascading down  burying the walls  burying the temples  burying the vast sprawling foundations of the residential zone  burying the camp .  and burying all of them .  she turned away  face to the wall of the cliff  and waited for the end to come .  a little to her surprise and chagrin  she found herself sobbing hysterically  sudden deep wails rising from the core of her body .  she didn t want to die .  of course not  who did .  but she had never realized until this moment that there might be something worse than dying .  beklimot  the most famous archaeological site in the world  the oldest known city of mankind  the foundation of civilization  was going to be destroyed purely as a result of her negligence .  generations of kalgash s great archaeologists had worked here in the century and a half since beklimot s discovery  first galdo      the greatest of them all  and then marpin  stinnupad  shelbik  numoin  the whole glorious roster and now siferra  who had foolishly left the whole place uncovered while a sandstorm was approaching .  so long as beklimot had been buried beneath the sands  the ruins had slumbered peacefully for thousands of years  preserved as they had been on the day when its last inhabitants finally yielded to the harshness of the changing climate and abandoned the place .  each archaeologist who had worked there since galdo s day had taken care to expose just a small section of the site  and to put up screens and sand fences to guard against the unlikely but serious danger of a sandstorm .  until now .  she had put up the usual screens and fences too  of course .  but not in front of the new digs  not in the sanctuary area where she had focused her investigations .  some of beklimot s oldest and finest buildings were there .  and she  impatient to begin excavating  carried away by her perpetual buoyant urge to go on and on  had failed to take the most elementary precautions .  it hadn t seemed that way to her at the time  naturally .  but now  with the demonic roaring of the sandstorm in her ears  and the sky black with destruction  just as well  siferra thought  that i won t survive this .  and therefore won t have to read what they re going to say about me in every book on archaeology that gets published in the next fifty years .   the great site of beklimot  which yielded unparalleled data about the early development of civilization on kalgash until its unfortunate destruction as a result of the slipshod excavation practices employed by the young  ambitious s ferra    of saro university    i think it s ending   balik whispered .   what is .   she said .   the storm .  listen .  it s getting quiet out there .    we must be buried in so much sand that we can t hear anything  that s all .    no .  we aren t buried  siferra .   balik tugged at the tarpaulin in front of them and managed to lift it a little way .  siferra peered out into the open area between the cliff and the wall of the city .  she couldn t believe her eyes .  what she saw was the clear deep blue of the sky .  and the gleam of sunlight .  it was only the bleak  chilly white glow of the double suns tano and sitha  but just now it was the most beautiful light she ever wanted to see .  the storm had passed through .  everything was calm again .  and where was the sand .  why wasn t everything entombed in sand .  the city was still visible  the great blocks of the stone wall  the shimmering glitter of the mosaics  the peaked stone roof of the temple of the suns .  even most of their tents were still standing  including nearly all of the important ones .  only the camp where the workers lived had been badly damaged  and that could be repaired in a few hours .  astounded  still not daring to believe it  siferra stepped out of the shelter and looked around .  the ground was clear of loose sand .  the hard baked  tight packed dark stratum that had formed the surface of the land in the excavation zone could still be seen .  it looked different now  abraded in a curious scrubbed way  but it was clear of any deposit the storm might have brought .  balik said wonderingly   first came the sand  and then came wind behind it .  and the wind picked up all the sand that got dropped on us  picked it up as fast as it fell  and scooped it right on along to the south .  a miracle  siferra .  that s the only thing we can call it .  look you can see where the ground s been scraped  where the whole shallow upper layer of ground sand s been cleaned away by the wind  maybe fifty years  worth of erosion in five minutes  but   siferra was scarcely listening .  she caught balik by the arm and turned him to the side  away from the main sector of their excavation site .   look there   she said .   where .  what .   she pointed .   the hill of thombo .   the broad shouldered stratigrapher stared .   gods .  it s been slit right up the middle .   the hill of thombo was an irregular middling high mound some fifteen minutes  walk south of the main part of the city .  no one had worked it in well over a hundred years  not since the second expedition of the great pioneer galdo      and galdo hadn t found anything of significance in it .  it was generally considered to be nothing but a midden heap on which the citizens of old beklimot had tossed their kitchen garbage interesting enough of itself  yes  but trivial in comparison with the wonders that abounded everywhere else in the site .  apparently  though  the hill of thombo had taken the fullest brunt of the storm  and what generations of archaeologists had not bothered to do  the violence of the sandstorm had achieved in only a moment .  an erratic zigzagging strip had been ripped from the face of the hill  like some terrible wound laying bare much of the interior of its upper slope .  and experienced field workers like siferra and balik needed only a single glance to understand the importance of what was now exposed .   a town site under the midden   balik murmured .   more than one  i think .  possibly a series   siferra said .   you think .    look .  look there  on the left .   balik whistled .   isn t that a wall in crosshatch style  under the corner of that cyclopean foundation .    you ve got it .   a shiver ran down siferra s spine .  she turned to balik and saw that he was as astounded as she was .  his eyes were wide  his face was pale .   in the name of darkness .   he muttered huskily .   what do we have here  siferra .    i m not sure .  but i m going to start finding out right this minute .   she looked back at the shelter under the cliff  where thuvvjk and his men still crouched in terror  making holy signs and babbling prayers in low stunned voices as if unable to comprehend that they were safe from the power of the storm .   thuvvik .   siferra yelled  gesturing vigorously  almost angrily  at him .   come on out of there  you and your men .  we ve got work to do .    harrim     was a big beefy man of about fifty  with great slabs of muscle bulging on his arms and chest  and a good thick insulating layer of fat over that .  sheerin  studying him through the window of the hospital room  knew right away that he and harrim were going to get along .   i ve always been partial to people who are  well  oversized   the psychologist explained to kelaritan and cubello .   having been one myself for most of my life  you understand .  not that i ve ever been a muscleman like this one .   sheerin laughed pleasantly .   i m blubber through and through .  except for here  of course   he added  tapping the side of his head .    what kind of work does this harrim do .    longshoreman   kelaritan said .   thirty five years on the jonglor docks .  he won a ticket to the opening day of the tunnel of mystery in a lottery .  took his whole family .  they were all affected to some degree  but he was the worst .  that s very embarrassing to him  that a great strong man like him should have such a total breakdown .    i can imagine   sheerin said .   i ll take that into account .  let s talk with him  shall we .   they entered the room .  harrim was sitting up  staring without interest at a spinner cube that was casting light in half a dozen colors on the wall opposite his bed .  he smiled affably enough when he saw kelaritan  but seemed to stiffen when he noticed the lawyer cubello walking behind the hospital director  and his face turned completely glacial at the sight of sheerin .   who s he .   he asked kelaritan .   another lawyer .    not at all .  this is sheerin      from saro university .  he s here to help you get well .    huh   harrim snorted .   another double brain .  what good have any of you done for me .    absolutely right   sheerin said .   the only one who can really help harrim get well is harrim  eh .  you know that and i know that  and maybe i can persuade the hospital people here to see that too .   he sat down on the edge of the bed .  it creaked beneath the psychologist s bulk .   at least they have decent beds in this place  though .  they must be pretty good if they can hold the two of us at the same time .   don t like lawyers  i gather .  you and me both  friend .    miserable troublemakers is all they are   harrim said .   full of tricks  they are .  they make you say things you don t mean  telling you that they can help you if you say such and such  and then they end up using your own words against you .  that s the way it seems to me  anyway .   sheerin looked up at kelaritan .   is it absolutely necessary that cubello be here for this interview .  i think it might go a little more smoothly without him .    i am authorized to take part in any   cubello began stiffly .   please   kelaritan said  and the word had more force than politeness behind it .   sheerin s right .  three visitors at once may be too many for harrim today  anyway .  and you ve already heard his story .    well   cubello said  his face dark .  but after a moment he turned and went out of the room .  sheerin surreptitiously signaled to kelaritan that he should take a seat in the far corner .  then  turning to the man in the bed  he smiled his most agreeable smile and said   it s been pretty rough  hasn t it .    you said it .    how long have you been in here .   harrim shrugged .   i guess a week  two weeks .  or maybe a little more .  i don t know  i guess .  ever since   he fell silent .   the jonglor exposition .   sheerin prompted .   since i took that ride  yes .    it s been a little more than just a week or two   sheerin said .   has it .   harrim s eyes took on a glazed look .  he didn t want to hear about how long he d been in the hospital .  changing tack  sheerin said   i bet you never dreamed a day would come when you d tell yourself you d be glad to get back to the docks  eh .   with a grin  harrim said   you can say that again .  boy  what i wouldn t give to be slinging those crates around tomorrow .   he looked at his hands .  big  powerful hands  the fingers thick  flattened at the tips  one of them crooked from some injury long ago .   i m getting soft  laying here all this time .  by the time i get back to work i won t be any good any more .    what s keeping you here  then .  why don t you just get up and put your street clothes on and get out of here .   kelaritan  from the corner  made a warning sound .  sheerin gestured at him to keep quiet .  harrim gave sheerin a startled look .   just get up and walk out .    why not .  you aren t a prisoner .    but if i did that if i did that   the dockworker s voice trailed off .   if you did that  what .   sheerin asked .  for a long while harrim was silent  face downcast  brow heavily knitted .  several times he began to speak but cut himself off .  the psychologist waited patiently .  finally harrim said  in a tight  husky  half strangled tone   i can t go out there .  because of the because because of the   he struggled with himself .   the darkness   he said .   the darkness   said sheerin .  the word hung there between them like a tangible thing .  harrim looked troubled by it  even abashed .  sheerin remembered that among people of harrim s class it was a word that was rarely used in polite company .  to harrim it was  if not actually obscene  then in some sense sacrilegious .  no one on kalgash liked to think about darkness  but the less education one had  the more threatening it was to let one s mind dwell on the possibility that the six friendly suns might somehow totally disappear from the sky all at once  that utter blackness might reign .  the idea was unthinkable literally unthinkable .   the darkness  yes   harrim said .   what i m afraid of is that that if i go outside i ll find myself in the darkness again .  that s what it is .  the dark  all over again .    complete symptom reversal in the last few weeks   kelaritan said in a low voice .   at first it was just the opposite .  you couldn t get him to go indoors unless you sedated him .  a powerful case of claustrophobia first  that is  and then after some time the total switch to claustrophilia .  we think it s a sign that he s healing .      maybe so   sheerin said .   but if you don t mind   to harrim he said  gently   you were one of the first to ride through the tunnel of mystery  weren t you .    on the very first day .   a note of pride came into harrim s voice .   there was a city lottery .  a hundred people won free rides .  there must have been a million tickets sold  and mine was the fifth one picked .  me  my wife  my son  my two daughters  we all went on it .  the very first day .    do you want to tell me a little about what it was like .    well   harrim said .   it was   he paused .   i never was in darkness ever  you know .  not even a dark room .  not ever .  it wasn t something that interested me .  we always had a godlight in the bedroom when i was growing up  and when i got married and had my own house i just naturally had one there too .  my wife feels the same way .  darkness  it isn t natural .  it isn t anything that was meant to be .    yet you entered the lottery .    well  this was just once .  and it was like entertainment  you know .  something special .  a holiday treat .  the big exposition  the five hundredth year of the city  right .  everybody was buying tickets .  and i figured  this must be something different  this must be something really good  or why else would they have built it .  so i bought the ticket .  and when i won  everybody at the docks was jealous  they all wished they had the ticket  some of them even wanted to buy it from me   no  sir   i told them   not for sale  me and my family  this is our ticket    so you were excited about taking the ride in the tunnel .    yeah .  you bet .    and when you were actually doing it .  when the ride started .  what did that feel like .    well   harrim began .  he moistened his lips  and his eyes seemed to look off into a great distance .   there were these little cars  you see  nothing but slats inside for seats  and the cars were open on top .  you got in  six people in each one  except they let just the five of us go together  because we were all one family  and it was almost enough to fill a whole car without putting a stranger in with us .  and then you heard music and the car started to move into the tunnel .  very slow  it went  not like a car on the highway would  just creeping along .  and then you were inside the tunnel .  and then then   sheerin waited again .   go on   he said after a minute  when harrim showed no sign of resuming .   tell me about it .  i really want to know what it was like .    then the darkness   harrim said hoarsely .  his big hands were trembling at the recollection .   it came down on you like they dropped a giant hat over you  you know .  and everything turned black all at once .   the trembling was becoming a violent tremor .   i heard my son trinit laugh .  he s a wise guy  trinit is .  he thought the darkness was something dirty  i bet you .  so he was laughing  and i told him to shut up  and then one of my daughters began to cry a little  and i told her it was okay  that there was nothing to worry about  that it was just going to be for fifteen minutes  and she ought to look at it like it was a treat  not something to be scared of .  and then then   silence again .  this time sheerin didn t prompt .   then i felt it closing in on me .  everything was darkness darkness you can t imagine what it was like you can t imagine how black it was how black the darkness the darkness   suddenly harrim shuddered  and great racking sobs came from him  almost like convulsions .   the darkness oh  god  the darkness  .    easy  man .  there s nothing to be afraid of here .  look at the sunlight .  four suns today  harrim .  easy  man .    let me take care of this   kelaritan said .  he had come rushing to the bedside when the sobbing began .  a needle glinted in his hand .  he touched it to harrim s burly arm  and there was a brief whirr of sound .  harrim grew calm almost at once .  he slumped back against his pillow  smiling glassily .    we need to leave him now   said kelaritan .   but i ve hardly only begun to    he won t make any sense again for hours  now .  we might as well go for lunch .    lunch  yes   sheerin said halfheartedly .  to his own surprise he felt almost rio appetite at all .  he could scarcely remember a time when he had felt that way .   and he s one of your strongest ones .    one of the most stable  yes .    what are the others like  then .    some are completely catatonic .  others need sedation at least half the time .  in the first stage  as i said  they don t want to come in out of the open .  when they emerged from the tunnel they seemed to be in perfect order  you understand  except that they had developed instant claustrophobia .  they would refuse to go into buildings any buildings  including palaces  mansions  apartment houses  tenements  huts  shacks  lean tos  and tents .   sheerin felt a profound sense of shock .  he had done his doctoral work in darkness induced disorders .  that was why they had asked him to come here .  but he had never heard of anything as extreme as this .   they wouldn t go indoors at all .  where d they sleep .    in the open .    did anyone try to force them inside .    oh  they did  of course they did .  whereupon these people went into violent hysterics .  some of them even became suicidal they d run up to a wall and hit their heads against it  things like that .  once you did get them inside  you couldn t keep them there without a straitjacket and a good stiff injection of some strong sedative .   sheerin looked at the big longshoreman  who was sleeping now  and shook his head .   the poor devils .    that was the first phase .  harrim s in the second phase now  the claustrophilic one .  he s adapted to being here  and the whole syndrome has swung completely around .  he knows that it s safe in the hospital  bright lights all the time .  but even though he can see the suns shining through the window he s afraid to go outside .  he thinks it s dark out there .    but that s absurd   sheerin said .   it s never dark out there .   the instant he said it  he felt like a fool .  kelaritan rubbed it in all the same  though .   we all realize that  dr .  sheerin .  any sane person does .  but the trouble with the people who have undergone trauma in the tunnel of mystery is that they are no longer sane .    yes .  so i gather   said sheerin shamefacedly .   you can meet some of our other patients later today   kelaritan said .   perhaps they ll provide you with some other perspectives on the problem .  and then tomorrow we ll take you over to see the tunnel itself .  we have it closed down  of course  now that we know the difficulties  but the city fathers are very eager to find some way to reopen it .  the investment  i understand  was immense .  but we should have lunch first  yes  doctor .    lunch  yes   said sheerin once again  even less enthusiastically than before .   the great dome of the saro university observatory  rising majestically to dominate the forested slopes of observatory mount  glinted brilliantly in the light of late afternoon .  the small red orb of dovim had already slipped beyond the horizon  but onos was still high in the west  and trey and patru  crossing the eastern sky on a sharp diagonal  etched shining trails of brightness along the dome s immense face .  beenay     a slender  agile young man with a quick  alert way of carrying himself  darted briskly about the small apartment below the observatory in saro city that he shared with his contract mate  raissta      gathering his books and papers together .  raissta  sprawled comfortably on the worn green upholstery of their little couch  looked up and frowned .   going somewhere  beenay .    to the observatory .    it s so early  though .  you usually don t go there until after onos sets .  and that won t be for hours yet .    i ve got an appointment today  raissta .   she gave him a warm  seductive look .  they were both graduate students in their late twenties  each an assistant professor  he in astronomy  she in biology  and they had been contract mates only seven months .  their relationship was still in its first bloom of excitement .  but problems had already arisen .  he did his work in the late hours  when usually only a few of the lesser suns were in the sky .  she was at her freshest and best in the period of high daylight  under the golden glow of bright onos .  lately he had spent more and more time at the observatory  and it was getting so that they were almost never awake at the same time .  beenay knew how trying that was for her .  it was trying for him .  all the same  the work he was doing on kalgash s orbit was demanding stuff  and it was leading him into ever more difficult regions that he found both challenging and frightening .  if only raissta would be patient just another few weeks a month or two  maybe   can t you stay here a little while longer this evening .   she asked .  his heart sank .  raissta was giving him her come here andlet s play look .  not easy to resist  nor did he really want to .  but yimot and faro would be waiting .   i told you .  i have an     appointment  yes .  well  so do i .  with you .    me .    you said yesterday you might have some free time this afternoon .  i was counting on that  you know .  i cleared a whole swatch of free time of my own did my lab work in the morning  as a matter of fact  just so   worse and worse  beenay thought .  he did remember saying something about this afternoon  completely overlooking the fact that he had arranged to meet the two younger students .  she was pouting now  and somehow smiling at the same time  a trick that she managed to perfection .  beenay wanted to forget all about faro and yimot and go to her right away .  but if he did that  he might be an hour late for his appointment with them  which wasn t fair .  two hours  maybe .  and he had to admit to himself that he was desperately eager to know whether their calculations had confirmed his own .  it was practically an even struggle  the powerful appeal of raissta on the one hand  and the desire to put his mind at rest concerning a major scientific issue on the other .  and though he had an obligation to be on time for his appointment  beenay realized in some confusion that he had made an appointment of sorts with raissta too and that was a matter not only of obligation but of delight .   look   he said  going to the couch and taking her hand in his .   i can t be in two places at once  okay .  and when i told you what i did yesterday  it had slipped my mind that faro and yimot would be coming to the observatory to see me .  but i ll make a deal with you .  let me get up there and take care of the thing with them  and then i ll skip out and be back here a couple of hours from now .  how does that sound .    you re supposed to be photographing those asteroids this evening   she said  pouting again  and not smiling at all this time .   damn .  well  i ll ask thilanda to do the camera work for me  or hikkinan .  or somebody .  i ll be back by onos set  that s a promise .    a promise .   he squeezed her hand and gave her a qui  k sly grin .   one that i ll actually keep .  you can bet on that .  okay .  you aren t angry .    well    i ll get faro and yimot out of the way as fast as i can .    you d better .   as he began to assemble his papers again she said   what is this business with faro and yimot that s so terribly important  anyway .    lab work .  gravitational studies .    doesn t sound all that important to me  i have to say .    i hope it turns out not to be important to anybody   beenay replied .   but that s something i need to find out right now .    i wish i knew what you were talking about .   he glanced at his watch and took a deep breath .  he could stay here another minute or two  he supposed .   you know i ve been working lately on the problem of the orbital motion of kalgash around onos  don t you .    of course .    all right .  a couple of weeks ago i turned up an anomaly .  my orbital numbers didn t fit the theory of universal gravitation .  so i checked them  naturally  but they came out the same way the second time .  and the third .  and the fourth .  always the same anomaly  no matter what method of calculation i used .    oh  beenay  i m so very sorry to hear that .  you ve worked so hard on this  i know  and to discover that your conclusions aren t right    what if they are  though .    but you said    i don t know if my math is right or wrong  at this point .  as far as i can tell it is  but it doesn t seem conceivable that that can be so .  i ve checked and checked and checked  and i get the same result each time  with all sorts of cross checks built in to tell me that i haven t made an error in computation .  but the result that i m getting is an impossible one .  the only explanation i can come up with is that i m starting from a cockeyed assumption and doing everything else right from then on  in which case i m going to come up with the same wrong answer no matter which method of checking my calculations i use .  i might just be blind to a fundamental problem at the base of my whole set of postulates .  if you start with the wrong figure for planetary mass  for instance  you ll get the wrong orbit for your planet no matter how accurate the rest of your calculations may be .  are you following me .    so far  yes .    therefore i ve given the problem to faro and yimot  without really telling them what it s all about  and asked them to calculate the whole thing from scratch .  they re bright kids .  i can count on them to do decent math .  and if they end up with the same conclusion i did  even though they re coming at it from an angle that completely excludes whatever error i might have built into my own line of reasoning  then i ll have to admit that my figures are right after all .    but they can t be right  beenay .  didn t you say that your findings are contrary to the universal law of gravitation .    what if the universal law is wrong  raissta .    what .  what .   she stared at him .  there was utter bewilderment in her eyes .   you see the problem .   beenay asked .   why i need to know right away what yimot and faro have found .    no   she said .   no  i don t understand at all .    we can talk about it later .  i promise .    beenay   half in despair .   i ve got to go .  but i ll be back as fast as i can .  it s a promise  raissta .  a promise .    siferra paused only long enough to snatch a pick and a brush from the equipment tent  which had been knocked askew by the sandstorm but was still reasonably intact .  then she went scrambling up the side of the hill of thombo  with balik ponderously hauling himself right behind her .  young eilis    had appeared from the shelter by the cliff now  and he stood below  staring up at them .  thuvvik and his corps of workmen were a little farther back  watching  scratching their heads in puzzlement .   watch out   siferra called to balik  when she had reached the beginning of the open gouge in the hill that the sandstorm had carved .   i m going to run a trial cut .    shouldn t we photograph it first  and    i told you to watch out   she said sharply  as she dug her pick into the hillside and sent a shower of loose soil tumbling down onto his head and shoulders .  he jumped aside  spitting out sand .   sorry   she said  without looking down .  she cut into the hillside a second time  widening the storm gouge .  it wasn t the best of technique  she knew  to be slashing away like this .  her mentor  grand old shelbik  was probably whirling in his grave .  and the founder of their science  the revered galdo      no doubt was looking down from his exalted place in the pantheon of archaeologists and shaking his head sadly .  on the other hand  shelbik and galdo had had chances of their own to uncover whatever lay in the hill of thombo  and they hadn t done it .  if she was a little too excited now  a little too hasty in her attack  well  they would simply have to forgive her .  now that the seeming calamity of the sandstorm had been transformed into serendipitous good fortune  now that the apparent ruination of her career had turned unexpectedly into the making of it  siferra could not hold herself back from finding out what was builed here .  could not .  absolutely could not .   look   she muttered  knocking a great mass of overburden away and going to work with her brush .   we ve got a charred layer here  right at the foundation level of the cyclopean city .  the place must have burned clear down to the stone .  but you look a little lower on the hill and you can see that the crosshatch style town is sitting right under the fire line the cyclopean people simply plunked this whole monumental foundation down on top of the older city    siferra   said balik uneasily .   i know  i know .  but let me at least begin to see what s here .  just a quick probe now  and then we can go back to doing things the proper way .   she felt as though she were perspiring from head to toe .  her eyes were starting to ache  so fiercely was she staring .   look  will you .  we re way up on top of the hill  and we ve already got two towns .  and it s my guess that if we unzip the mound a little further  someplace around where we d expect to find the foundations of the crosshatch people  we ll  yes .  yes .  there .  by darkness  will you look at that  balik .  just look .   she pointed triumphantly with the tip of her pick .  another dark line of charcoal was apparent  near the foundations of the crosshatch style building .  the second highest level had also been destroyed by fire just as the cyclopean one had .  and from the way things looked  it was sitting atop the ruins of an even older village .  balik now had caught her fervor too .  together they worked to lay bare the outer face of the hill  midway between ground level and the shattered summit .  eilis called up to them to ask what on kalgash they were doing  but they ignored him .  aflame with eagerness and curiosity  they cut swiftly through the ancient packing of windblown sand  moving three inches farther down the hill  six  eight   do you see what i see .   siferra cried  after a time .   another village  yes .  but what kind of style of architecture is that  would you say .   she shrugged .   it s a new one on me .    and me too .  something very archaic  that s for sure .    no question of it .  but i think it s not the most archaic thing we ve got here  not by plenty .   siferra peered down toward the distant ground .   you know what i think  balik .  we ve got five towns here  six  seven  maybe eight  each one right on top of the next .  you and i may spend the rest of our lives digging in this hill .   they looked at each other in wonder .   we d better get down and take some photos now   he said quietly .   yes .  yes  we d better do that .   she felt almost calm  suddenly .  enough of this furious hacking and slashing  she thought .  it was time to go back to being a professional now .  time to approach this hill like a scholar  not a treasure hunter or a journalist .  let balik take his photographs  first  from every side .  then take the soil samples at the surface level  and put in the first marker stakes  and go through all the rest of the standard preliminary procedures .    then a trial trench  a bold shaft right through the hill  to give us some idea of what we ve really got here .  and then  she told herself  we ll peel this hill layer by layer .  we ll take it apart  carving away each stratum to look at the one below it  until we re down to virgin soil .  and by the time we re done with that  she vowed  we ll know more about the prehistory of kalgash than all my predecessors put together have been able to learn since archaeologists first came here to beklimot to dig .   kelaritan said   we ve arranged everything for your inspection of the tunnel of mystery  dr .  sheerin .  if you ll be down in front of your hotel in about an hour  our car will pick you up .    right   sheerin said .   see you in about an hour .   the plump psychologist put down the phone and stared solemnly at himself in the mirror opposite his bed .  the face that looked back at him was a troubled one .  he seemed so wasted and haggard that he tugged at his cheeks to assure himself that they were still there .  yes  there they were  his familiar fleshy cheeks .  he hadn t lost an ounce .  the haggardness was all in his mind .  sheerin had slept badly had scarcely slept at all  so it seemed to him now and yesterday he had only picked at his food .  nor did he feel in the least hungry now .  the thought of going downstairs for breakfast had no appeal whatever .  that was an alien concept to him  not to feel hungry .  was the bleakness of his mood  he wondered  the result of his interviews with kelaritan s hapless patients yesterday .  or was he simply terrified of going through the tunnel of mystery .  certainly seeing those three patients hadn t been easy .  it was a long time since he d done any actual clinical work  and obviously his sojourn among the academics at saro university had attenuated the professional detachment that allows members of the healing arts to confront the ill without being overwhelmed by compassion and sorrow .  sheerin was surprised at that  how tenderhearted he seemed to have become  how thin skinned .  that first one  harrim  the longshoreman he looked tough enough to withstand anything .  and yet fifteen minutes of darkness on his trip through the tunnel of mystery had reduced him to such a state that merely to relive the trauma in memory sent him into babbling hysteria .  how terribly sad that was .  and then the other two  in the afternoon they had been in even worse shape .  gistin      the schoolteacher  that lovely frail woman with the dark  intelligent eyes she hadn t been able to stop sobbing for a moment  and though she was able to speak clearly and well  at least in the beginning  her story had degenerated into mere incoherent blurtings within a few sentences .  and chimmilit     the high school athlete  obviously a perfect physical specimen sheerin wasn t going quickly to forget how the boy had reacted to the sight of the afternoon sky when sheerin opened the blinds in his room .  there was onos blazing away in the west  and all that huge handsome boy could manage to say was   the darkness the darkness   before he turned away and tried to scuttle down under his bed .  the darkness the darkness  and now  sheerin thought gloomily  it s my turn to take a ride in the tunnel of mystery .  of course  he could simply refuse .  there was nothing in his consulting contract with the municipality of jonglor that required him to risk his sanity .  he d be able to render a valid enough opinion without actually sticking his neck into peril .  but something in him rebelled at such timidity .  his professional pride  if nothing else  was pushing him toward the tunnel he was here to study the phenomenon of darkness and to help these people work out ways not only of healing the present victims but of preventing recurrences of these tragedies .  how could he deign to explain what had happened to the tunnel s victims if he didn t make a close study of the cause of their disturbances .  he bad to .  it would be sheer malfeasance to back out .  nor did he want anyone  not even these strangers here in jonglor  to be able to accuse him of cowardice .  he remembered the taunts of his childhood   fatty is a coward .  fatty is a coward .   all because he hadn t wanted to climb a tree that was obviously beyond the capabilities of his heavy  ill coordinated body .  but fatty wasn t a coward .  sheerin knew that .  he was content with himself  a sane  well balanced man .  he simply didn t want other people making incorrect assumptions about him because of his unheroic appearance .  besides  fewer than one out of ten of those who had gone through the tunnel of mystery had come out of it showing any symptoms of emotional disturbance .  and those people must have been vulnerable in some special way .  precisely because he was so sane  sheerin told himself  because he was so well balanced  he had nothing to fear .  nothing  th  fear  he kept repeating those words to himself until he felt almost calm .  even so  sheerin was something other than his customary jolly self as he went downstairs to wait for the hospital car to pick him up .  kelaritan was there  and cubello  and a striking looking woman named varitta      who was introduced to him as one of the engineers who had designed the tunnel .  sheerin greeted them all with hearty handshakes and a broad smile that he hoped seemed convincing .   a nice day for a trip to the amusement park   he said  trying to sound jovial .  kelaritan looked at him oddly .   i m glad you feel that way .  did you sleep well  dr .  sheerin .    very well  thanks .  as well as could be expected  i should say .  after seeing those unhappy people yesterday .   cubello said   you aren t optimistic about their chances of recovery  then .    i d like to be   sheerin told the lawyer ambiguously .  the car moved smoothly down the street .   it s about a twenty minute drive to the centennial exposition grounds   kelaritan said .   the exposition itself will be crowded it is every day but we ve had a big section of the amusement area roped off so that we won t be disturbed .  the tunnel of mystery itself  as you know  has been shut down since the full extent of the troubles became apparent .    you mean the deaths .    obviously we couldn t allow the ride to remain open after that   cubello said .   but you must realize that we were considering shutting down much earlier .  it was a question of determining whether the people who appeared to have been disturbed by their trips through the tunnel were actually suffering harm or were merely falling in with popular hysteria .    of course   sheerin said  his tone a dry one .   the city council wouldn t have wanted to close down such a profitable attraction except for a really good reason .  such as having a bunch of the customers drop dead from fright  i suppose .   the atmosphere in the car became exceedingly chilly .  kelaritan said  after a time   the tunnel was not only a profitable attraction but also one that nearly everyone who attended the exposition was eager to experience  dr .  sheerin .  i understand that thousands of people had to be turned away every day .    even though it was obvious from the very first day that some of those who rode through the tunnel  like harrim and his family  were coming out of it in psychotic states .    especially because of that  doctor   cubello said .   what .    forgive me if i seem to be explaining your own specialty to you   the lawyer said unctuously .   but i d like to remind you that there s a fascination in being frightened when it  c part of a game .  a baby is born with three instinctive fears  of loud noises  of falling  and of the total absence of light .  that s why it s considered so funny to jump at someone and shout  boo .   that s why it s such fun to ride a roller coaster .  and that s why the tunnel of mystery was something everybody wanted to see at first hand .  people came out of that darkness shaking  breathless  half dead with fear  but they kept on paying to get in .  the fact that a few of those who took the ride came out of it in a rather intense state of shock only added to the appeal .    because most people assumed that they  d be tough enough to withstand whatever it was that had shaken up the others so much  is that it .    exactly  doctor .    and when some people came out not just highly upset but actually dead of fright .  even if the exposition managers couldn t see their way clear to shutting the thing down after that  i d imagine that potential customers would have become few and far between  once the news of the deaths got around .    ah  quite the contrary   said cubello  smiling triumphantly .   the same psychological mechanism operated  though even more strongly .  after all  if people with weak hearts wanted to go through the tunnel  it was at their own risk  why be surprised at what happened to them .  the city council discussed the whole thing at great length and agreed finally to put a doctor in the front office and have every customer undergo a physical examination before getting into the car .  that actually boosted ticket sales .    in that case   sheerin said   why is the tunnel shut down now .  from what you ve told me  i d expect it to be doing terrific business  lines stretching from jonglor all the way to khunabar  mobs of people going in the front way and a steady stream of corpses being hauled out the back .    dr .  sheerin .    well  why isn  t it still open  if even the deaths didn t trouble anybody .    the liability insurance problem   cubello said .   ah .  of course .    despite your grisly little turn of phrase just now  actual deaths were very few and far between three  i think  or maybe five .  the families of those who passed away were given adequate indemnities and the cases were closed .  what ultimately became a problem for us was not the death rate but the survival rate among those who underwent traumatic disturbance .  it began to become clear that some might require hospitalization for prolonged periods an ongoing expense  a constant financial drain on the municipality and its insurers .    i see   sheerin said morosely .   if they simply fall down dead  it s a one shot cost .  buy off the relatives and that s that .  but if they linger for months or years in a public institution  the price can get to be too high .    perhaps a little harshly put   said cubello .   but that is essentially the calculation the city council was forced to make .    dr .  sheerin seems a little testy this morning   kelaritan said to the lawyer .   possibly the idea of going through the tunnel himself is troublesome to him .    absolutely not   said sheerin at once .   of course you understand that there is no real necessity for you to    there is   sheerin said .  there was silence in the car .  sheerin peered somberly at the changing landscape  the curious angular scaly barked trees  the bushes with flowers of odd metallic hues  the peculiarly high and narrow houses with pointed eaves .  he had rarely been this far north before .  there was something very disagreeable about the look of the entire province and about this crew of mealymouthed cynical people  too .  he told himself that he d be glad to get home to saro again .  but first the tunnel of mystery  the jonglor centennial exposition was spread over a vast area of parkland just east of the city .  it was a mini city in itself  and quite spectacular in its own way  sheerin thought .  he saw fountains  arcades  shining pink and turquoise towers of iridescent stone hard plastic .  great exhibit halls offered art treasures from every province of kalgash  industrial displays  the latest scientific marvels .  wherever he looked there was something unusual and beautiful to engage his eye .  thousands of people  perhaps hundreds of thousands  strolled its glittering  elegant boulevards and avenues .  sheerin had always heard that the jonglor centennial exposition was one of the marvels of the world  and he saw now that it was true .  to be able to visit it was a rare privilege .  it was open only once every hundred years  for a three year run  to commemorate the anniversary of the city s founding and this  jonglor s fifth centennial exposition  was said to be the greatest of all .  indeed he felt sudden buoyant excitement  such as he had not known in a long while  as he traveled through its wellmanicured grounds .  he hoped that he d have some time later in the week to explore it on his own .  but his mood changed abruptly as the car swung around the perimeter of the exposition and brought them to an entrance in back that led to the amusement area .  here  just as kelaritan had said  great sections were roped off  and sullen crowds peered across the ropes in obvious annoyance as cubello  kelaritan  and varitta     led him toward the tunnel of mystery .  sheerin could hear them muttering angrily  a low harsh growling that he found unsettling and even a little intimidating .  he realized that the lawyer had told the truth  these people were angry because the tunnel was closed .  they re jealous  sheerin thought in wonder .  they know we re going to the tunnel  and they want to go too .  despite everything that s happened there .   we can go in this way   varitta said .  the facade of the tunnel was an enormous pyramidal structure  tapering away at the sides in an eerie  dizzying perspective .  in the center of it was a huge six sided entrance gate  dramatically outlined in scarlet and gold .  bars had been drawn across it .  varitta produced a key and unlocked a small door to the left of the facade  and they stepped through .  inside  everything seemed much more ordinary .  sheerin saw a series of metal railings no doubt designed to contain the lines of people waiting to board the ride .  beyond that was a platform much like that in any railway station  with a string of small open cars waiting there .  and beyond that  darkness .  cubello said   if you don t mind signing this first  please  doctor   sheerin stared at the paper the lawyer had handed him .  it was full of words  blurred  dancing about .   what is this .    a release .  the standard form .    yes .  of course .   airily sheerin scrawled his name without even trying to read the paper .  you are not afraid  he told himself .  you fear nothing at all .  varitta     put a small device in his hand .   an abort switch   she explained .   the full ride lasts fifteen minutes  but you just have to press this green panel here as soon as you ve been inside long enough to have learned what you need to know or in case you begin to feel uncomfortable and lights will come on .  your car will go quickly to the far end of the tunnel and circle back to the station .    thank you   sheerin said .   i doubt that i ll need it .    but you should have it .  just in case .    it s my plan to experience the ride to the fullest   he told her  enjoying his own pomposity .  but there was such a thing as foolhardiness  he reminded himself .  he didn t intend to use the abort switch  but it was probably unwise not to take it .  just in case .  he stepped out on the platform .  kelaritan and cubello were looking at him in an all too transparent way .  he could practically hear them thinking  this fat old fool is going to turn to jelly in there .  well  let them think it .  varitta had disappeared .  no doubt she had gone to turn on the tunnel mechanism .  yes  there she was now  in a control booth high up to the right  signaling that everything was ready .   if you ll board the car  doctor   kelaritan said .   of course .  of course .   fewer than one out of ten experienced harmful effects .  very likely they were unusually vulnerable to darkness disorders to begin with .  i am not .  i am a very stable individual .  he entered the car .  there was a safety belt  he strapped it around his waist  adjusting it with some difficulty to his girth .  the car began to roll forward  slowly  very slowly .  darkness was waiting for him .  fewer than one out often .  fewer than one out of ten .  he understood the darkness syndrome .  that would protect him  he was sure  his understanding .  even though all of mankind had an instinctive fear of the absence of light  that did not mean that the absence of light was of itself harmful .  what was harmful  sheerin knew  was one s reaction to the absence of light .  the thing to do is to stay calm .  darkness is nothing but darkness  a change of external circumstances .  we are conditioned to abhor it because we live in a world where darkness is unnatural  where there is always light  the light of the many suns .  at any time there might be as many as four suns shining at once  usually there were three in the sky  and at no time were there ever less than two and the light of any of them was sufficient all by itself to hold back the darkness .  the darkness  the darkness  the darkness .  sheerin was in the tunnel now .  behind him the last vestige of light disappeared  and he peered into an utter void .  there was nothing ahead of him  nothing .  a pit .  an abyss .  a zone of total lightlessness .  and he was tumbling headlong into it .  he felt sweat breaking out all over him .  his knees began to shake .  his forehead throbbed .  he held up his hand and was unable to see it in front of his face .  abort abort abort abort no .  absolutely not .  he sat upright  back rigid  eyes wide open  gazing stolidly into the nothingness through which he plunged .  on and on  ever deeper .  primordial fears bubbled and hissed in the depths of his soul  and he forced them back down and away .  the suns are still shining outside the tunnel  he told himself .  this is only temporary .  in fourteen minutes and thirty seconds i ll be back out there .  fourteen minutes and twenty seconds .  fourteen minutes and ten seconds .  fourteen minutes  was he moving at all  though .  he couldn t tell .  maybe he wasn t .  the car s mechanism was silent  and he had no reference points .  what if i m stuck .  he wondered .  just sitting here in the dark  no way to tell where i am  what s happening  how much time is passing .  fifteen minutes  twenty  half an hour .  until i ve passed whatever limit my sanity can stand  and then  there s always the abort switch  though .  but suppose it doesn t work .  what if i press it  and the lights don t come on .  i could test it  i suppose .  just to see  fatty is a coward .  fatty is a coward .  no .  no .  don t touch it .  once you turn the lights on you won t be able to turn them off again .  you mustn t use the abort switch  or they ll know they ll all know  fatty is a coward  fatty is a coward  suddenly  astonishingly  he hurled the abort switch into the darkness .  there was a tiny sound as it fell somewhere .  then silence again .  his hand felt terribly empty .  the darkness  the darkness  there was no end to it .  he was tumbling through an infinite abyss .  falling and falling and falling into the night  the endless night  the all devouring black  breathe deeply .  stay calm .  what if there   c permanent mental damage .  stay calm  he told himself .  you ll be all right .  you ve got maybe eleven minutes more of this at the worst  maybe only six or seven .  the suns are shining out there .  six or seven minutes and you ll never be in darkness again  not if you live to be a thousand .  the darkness  oh  god  the darkness  calm .  calm .  you re a very stable man  sheerin .  you re extremely sane .  you were sane when you went into this thing and you ll be sane when you come out .  tick .  tick .  tick .  every second gets you closer to the exit .  or does it .  this ride may never end .  i could be in here forever .  tick .  tick .  tick .  am i moving .  do i have five minutes left  or five seconds  or is this still the first minute .  tick .  tick .  why don  t they let me out .  can  t they tell bow i m suffering in here .  they don t want to let you out .  they ll never let you out .  they re going to  suddenly  a stabbing pain between his eyes .  an explosion of agony in his skull .  what s that .  light .  could it be .  yes .  yes .  thank god .  light  yes .  thank any god that might ever have existed .  he was at the end of the tunnel .  he was coming back to the station .  it must be .  yes .  yes .  his heartbeat  which had become a panicky thunder  was starting to return to normal .  his eyes  adjusting now to the return of normal conditions  began to focus on familiar things  blessed things  the stanchions  the platform  the little window in the control booth  cubello  kelaritan  watching him .  he felt ashamed now of his cowardice .  pull yourself together  sheerin .  it wasn  t so bad  really .  you  re all right .  you aren  t lying in the bottom of the car sucking your thumb and whimpering .  it was scary  it was terrifying  but it didn  t destroy you it wasn  t actually anything you couldn  t handle   here we go .  give us your hand  doctor .  up up   they hauled him to a standing position and steadied him as he clambered out of the car .  sheerin sucked breath deep down into his lungs .  he ran his hand across his forehead  wiping away the streaming perspiration .   the little abort switch   he murmured .   i seem to have lost it somewhere    how are you  doctor .   kelaritan asked .   how was it .   sheerin teetered .  the hospital director caught him by the arm  steadying him  but sheerin indignantly brushed him away .  he wasn t going to let them think that those few minutes in the tunnel had gotten to him .  but he couldn t deny that he had been affected .  try as he might  there was no way to hide that .  not even from himself .  no force in the world could ever get him to take a second trip through that tunnel  he realized .   doctor .  doctor .    i m all right   he said thickly .   he says he s all right   came the lawyer s voice .   stand back .  let him alone .    his legs are wobbling   kelaritan said .   he s going to fall .    no   sheerin said .   not a chance .  i m fine  i tell you .   he lurched and staggered  regained his balance  lurche again .  sweat poured from every pore he had .  he glanced ove his shoulder  saw the mouth of the tunnel  and shudderec turning away from that dark cave  he pulled his shoulders u high  as if he would have liked to hide his face between then  doctor .   kelaritan said doubtfully .  no use pretending .  this was foolishness  this vain and stut born attempt at heroism .  let them think he was a coward .  l them think anything .  those fifteen minutes had been the wor  nightmare of his life .  the impact of it was still sinking in  an sinking in  and sinking in .   it was powerful stuff   he said .   very powerful .  very di  turbing .    but you re basically all right  isn t that so .   the lawyer sai eagerly  a little shaken  yes who wouldn t be  going mt darkness  but basically okay as we knew you d be it s only few  a very few  who undergo any sort of harmful    no   sheerin said the lawyer s face was like that of a grir ning gargoyle in front of him like the face of a demon h couldn t bear the sight of it but a good dose of the truth woul exorcise the demon no need to be diplomatic  sheen thought not when talking with demons   it s impossible fc anyone to go through that thing without being at grave risi i m certain of it now .  even the strongest psyche will take terrible battering  and the weak ones will simply crumble i you open that ride again  you ll have every mental hospital   four provinces full up within six months   on the contrary  doctor    don t  on the contrary  me .  have you been in the tunne cubell  no  i didn t think so but i have you re paying fc my professional opinion  you might as well have it right no  the tunnel s deadly .  it s a simple matter of human natun darkness is more than most of us can handle  and that s nevc going to change  so long as we ve got a sun left burning in th sky .  shut the tunnel down for good  cubello .  in the name c sanity  man  shut the thing down .  shut it down .    parking his motor scooter in the faculty lot just below the observatory dome  beenay went jogging quickly up the footpath that led to the main entrance of the huge building .  as he began to ascend the wide stone steps of the entranceway itself he was startled to hear someone calling his name from above .   beenay .  so you are here after all .   the astronomer looked up .  the tall  heavyset  powerful figure of his friend theremon     of the saro city chronicle stood framed in the great door of the observatory .   theremon .  were you looking for me .    i was .  but they told me you weren t due to show up here for another couple of hours .  and then  just as i was  leaving  there you were anyway .  talk about serendipity .   beenay trotted up the last few steps  and they gave each other a quick hug .  he had known the newspaperman some three or four years  ever since the time theremon had come to the observatory to interview some scientist  any scientist  about the latest manifesto of the crackpot apostles of flame group .  gradually he and theremon had become close friends  even though theremon was some five years older and came out of a rougher  worldlier background .  beenay liked the idea of having a friend who had no involvement whatsoever in university politics  and theremon was delighted to know someone who wasn t at all interested in exploiting him for his considerable journalistic influence .   is something wrong .   beenay asked .   not in the least .  but i need to get you to do the voice of science routine again .  mondior s made another of his famous  repent  repent  doom is coming  speeches .  now he says he s ready to reveal the exact hour when the world will be destroyed .  in case you re interested  it s going to happen next year on the nineteenth of theptar  as a matter of fact .    that madman .  it s a waste of space printing anything about him .  why does anyone pay the slightest bit of attention to the apostles  anyway .   theremon shrugged .   the fact is that people do .  a lot of people  beenay .  and  if mondior says the end is nigh  i need to get someone like you to stand up and say   not so  brothers and sisters .  have no fear .  all is well .   or words to that effect .  i can count on you  can t i  beenay .    you know you can .    this evening .    this evening .  oh  lord  theremon  this evening s a real mess .  how much of my time do you think you d have to have .    half an hour .  forty five minutes .    look   beenay said   i ve got an urgent appointment right now that s why i m here ahead of schedule .  after that  i ve sworn to raissta that i ll hustle back home and devote  well  an hour or two to her .  we ve been on such different tracks lately that we ve hardly seen each other at all .  and then later in the evening i m supposed to be here at the observatory again to supervise taking of a bunch of photographs of    all right   said theremon .   i see i ve picked the wrong time for this .  well  listen  no problem  beenay .  i ve got until tomorrow afternoon to turn in my story .  what if we talk in the morning .    the morning .   beenay said doubtfully .   i know morning s an unthinkable concept for you .  but what i mean is  i can get back up here at onos rise  just as you re finishing up your evening s work .  if you could simply manage a little interview with me before you go home to go to sleep     for a friend  beenay .   beenay gave the journalist a weary look .   of course i will .  that s not the issue .  it s just that i may be so groggy after a whole evening of work that i may not be of any use to you .   theremon grinned .   that doesn t worry me .  i ve noticed that you re capable of degroggifying pretty damned quickly when there s anti scientific nonsense for you to refute .  tomorrow at onos rise  then .  in your office upstairs .    right .    a million thanks  pal .  i ll owe you one for this .    don t mention it .   theremon saluted and began to head down the steps .   give my best to that beautiful lady of yours   he called .   and i ll see you in the morning .    see you in the morning  yes   beenay echoed .  how odd that sounded .  he never saw anybody or anything in the morning .  but he d make an exception for theremon .  that was what friendship was all about  wasn t it .  beenay turned and entered the observatory .  inside  all was dimly lit and calm  the familiar hush of the great hall of science where he had spent most of his time since his early university days .  but the calm was  he knew  a deceptive one .  this mighty building  like the more mundane places of the world  was constantly aswirl with conflicts of all sorts  ranging from the loftiest of philosophical disputes down to the pettiest of trivial feuds  spats  and backbiting intrigues .  astronomers  as a group  were no more virtuous than anyone else .  all the same  the observatory was a sanctuary for beenay and for most of the others who worked there a place where they could leave most of the world s problems behind and devote themselves more or less peacefully to the everlasting struggle to answer the great questions that the universe posed .  he walked swiftly down the long main hall  trying as always without success to muffle the clatter of his boots against the marble floor .  as he invariably did  he glanced quickly into the display cases along the wall to the right and left  where some of the sacred artifacts of the history of astronomy were on perpetual exhibit .  here were the crude  almost comical telescopes that such pioneers as chekktor and stanta had used  four or five hundred years before .  here were the gnarled black lumps of meteorites that had fallen from the sky over the centuries  enigmatic reminders of the mysteries that lay behind the clouds .  here were first editions of the great astronomical sky charts and textbooks  and the time yellowed manuscripts of some of the epoch making theoretical works of the great thinkers .  beenay paused for a moment before the last of those manuscripts  which unlike the others seemed fresh and almost new  for it was only a single generation old  athor    s classic codification of the theory of universal gravitation  worked out not very long before beenay himself had been born .  though he was not a particularly religious man  beenay stared at that thin sheaf of paper with something very much like reverence  and found himself thinking something very much like a prayer .  the theory of universal gravitation was one of the pillars of the cosmos for him  perhaps the most basic pillar .  he couldn t imagine what he would do if that pillar were to fall .  and it seemed to him now that the pillar might be tottering .  at the end of the hall  behind a handsome bronze door  was dr .  athor s own office .  beenay glanced at it quickly and hurried past it  up the stairs .  the venerable and still formidable observatory director was the last person in the world  absolutely the last  that beenay wanted to see at this moment .  faro and yimot were waiting for him upstairs in the chart room  where they had arranged to meet .   sorry i m a little late   beenay said .   it s been a complicated afternoon so far .   they gave him nervous  owlish smiles .  what a strange pair they are  he thought  not for the first time .  they both came from some backwater farming province sithin  maybe  or gatamber .  faro    was short and roly poly  with a languid  almost indolent way of moving .  his general style was easygoing and casual .  his friend yimot    was incredibly tall and thin  something like a hinged ladder with arms  legs  and a face  and you practically needed a telescope to see his head  looming up there in the stratosphere above you .  yimot was as tense and twitchy as his friend was relaxed .  yet they were inseparable  always had been .  of all the young graduate students  one notch down the observatory s table of organization from beenay s level  they were by far the most brilliant .   we haven t been waiting long   yimot said at once .   only a minute or two  dr .  beenay   faro added .   not quite  doctor  yet  thanks   beenay said .   i ve still got the final inquisition to go through .  how did you manage with those computations .   yimot said  twitching and jerking his impossibly long legs around   this is gravitational stuff  isn t it  sir .   faro nudged him so vigorously in the ribs with his elbow that beenay expected to hear the sound of crunching bone .   that s all right   beenay said .   yimot s correct  as a matter of fact .   he gave the tall young man a pale smile .   i wanted this to be a purely abstract mathematical exercise for you .  but it doesn t surprise me that you were able to figure out the context .  you figured it out after you had your result  didn t you .    yes  sir   said yimot and faro at the same time .   we ran all the calculations first   faro said .   then we took a second look  and the context became apparent   said yimot .   ah .  yes   beenay said .  these kids were sometimes a little unnerving .  they were so young only six or seven years younger than he  as a matter of fact  but he was an assistant professor and they were students  and to him and them both that was a vast barrier .  young as they were  though  they had such extraordinary minds .  he wasn t altogether pleased that they had guessed at the conceptual matrix within which these calculations were located .  in fact  he wasn t pleased at all .  in another few years they d be right up here on the faculty with him  perhaps competing for the same professorship he hoped to get  and that might not be fun .  but he tried not to think about that .  he reached for their printout .   may i see .   he asked .  hands fluttering wildly  yimot handed it over .  beenay scanned the rows of figures  calmly at first  then with rising agitation .  he had been pondering  all year long  certain implications of the theory of universal gravitation  which his mentor athor had brought to such a summit of perfection .  it had been athor s great triumph  the making of his lofty reputation  to work out the orbital motions of kalgash and all six of its suns according to rational principles of attractive forces .  beenay  using modern computational equipment  had been calculating some aspects of kalgash s orbit around onos  its primary sun  when to his horror he observed that his figures didn t check out properly in terms of the theory of universal gravitation .  the theory said that at the beginning of the present year kalgash should have been here in relation to onos  when in undeniable fact kalgash was there .  the deviation was trivial a matter of a few decimal places  but that wasn t trivial at all  in the larger sense of things .  the theory of universal gravitation was so precise that most people preferred to refer to it as the law of universal gravitation .  its mathematical underpinning was considered impeccable .  but a theory that purports to explain the movements of the world through space  has no room for even small discrepancies .  either it is complete or it is not complete  no middle way was permissible .  and a difference of a few decimal places in a shortrange calculation would widen into a vast abyss  beenay knew  if more ambitious computations were attempted .  what good was the whole theory of universal gravitation if the position that it said kalgash was going to hold in the sky a century from now turned out to be halfway around onos from the planet s actual location then .  beenay had gone over his figures until he was sick of reworking them .  the result was always the same .  but what was he supposed to believe .  his numbers  or athor s towering master scheme .  his piddling notions of astronomy  or the great athor s profound insight into the fundamental structure of the universe .  he imagined himself standing right on top of the dome of the observatory  calling out   listen to me  everybody .  athor s theory is wrong .  i ve got the figures right here that disprove it .   which would bring forth such gales of laughter that he d be blown clear across the continent .  who was he to set himself up against the titanic athor .  who could possibly believe that a callow assistant professor had toppled the law of universal gravitation .  and yet and yet  his eyes raced over the printout sheets that yimot and faro had prepared .  the calculations on the first two pages were unfamiliar to him  he had set up the data for the two students in such a way that the underlying relationships from which the numbers were derived were not at all obvious  and evidently they had approached the problem in a way that any astronomer trying to compute a planetary orbit would regard as quite unorthodox .  which was exactly what beenay had wanted .  the orthodox ways had led him only into catastrophic conclusions  but he had too much information at his own disposal to be able to work in any other mode but the orthodox ones .  faro and yimot hadn t been hampered in that fashion .  but as he followed along their line of reasoning  beenay began to notice a discomforting convergence of the numbers .  by the third page they had locked in with his own calculations  which he knew by heart by this time .  and from there on  everything followed in an orderly way  step by step by step  to the same dismaying  shattering  inconceivable  totally unacceptable culminating result .  beenay looked up at the two students  aghast .   there s no possibility  is there  that you ve slipped up somewhere .  this string of integrations here  for example they look pretty tricky    sir .   yimot cried  sounding shocked to the core .  his face was bright red and his arms waved about as if moving of their own accord .  faro said  more placidly   i m afraid they re correct  sir .  they tally frontwards and backwards .    yes .  i imagine they do   said beenay dully .  he struggled to conceal his anguish .  but his hands were shaking so badly that the printout sheets began to flutter in his grasp .  he started to put them down on the table before him  but his wrist jerked uncontrollably in a very yimot like gesture and sent them scattering all over the floor .  faro knelt to pick them up .  he gave beenay a troubled look .   sir  if we ve upset you in any way    no .  no  not at all .  i didn t sleep well today  that s the problem .  but this is fine work  unquestionably very fine .  i m proud of you .  to take a problem like this  one which has utterly no real world resonance at all  which in fact is in total contradiction of real world scientific truth  and to follow so methodically to the conclusion required by the data while succeeding in ignoring the fact that the initial premise is absurd why  it s a splendid job  an admirable demonstration of your powers of logic  a first rate thought experiment   he saw them exchange quick glances .  he wondered if he was fooling them even slightly .   and now   he went on   if you ll excuse me  fellows i have another conference   rolling the damning papers into a tight cylinder  beenay shoved them under his arm and rushed past them  out the door  down the hall  practically running  heading for the safety and privacy of his own tiny office .  my god  he thought .  my god  my god  my god  what have i done .  and what will i do now .  he buried his head in his hands and waited for the throbbing to stop .  but it didn t seem to be planning to stop .  after a moment he sat up and jabbed his finger against the communicator button on his desk .   get me the saro city chronicle   he told the machine .   theremon     .   from the communicator came a long  maddening burst of cracklings and hissings .  then  suddenly  theremon s deep voice   features desk  theremon     .    beenay .    what s that .  i can t hear what you re saying .   beenay realized that he hadn t managed to get out anything more than a croak .   it s beenay  i said .  i i want to change our appointment time .    to change it .  look  fellow  i understand how you feel about mornings  because so do i .  but i ve absolutely got to talk to you no later than noon tomorrow or i ll have no story here .  i ll make it up to you any way i can  but    you don t understand .  i want to see you sooner  not later  theremon .    what .    this evening .  let s say half past nine .  or ten  if you can t make it .    i thought you had photographs to take at the observatory .    the deuce with the photos  man .  i need to see you .    need to .  beenay  what s happened .  is it something with raissta .    it has nothing to do with raissta in the slightest .  half past nine .  at the six suns .    six suns  half past nine  yes   theremon said .   it s a date .   beenay broke the contact and sat for a long moment staring at the rolled paper cylinder before him  somberly shaking his head .  he felt fractionally calmer now  but only fractionally .  confiding in theremon would make it easier to bear the burden of all this .  he trusted theremon completely .  newsmen were generally not noted for their trustworthiness  beenay knew  but theremon was a friend first  a journalist after that .  he had never betrayed beenay s confidence  not once .  even so  beenay didn t have any idea of his next move .  maybe theremon would be able to come up with something .  maybe .  he left the observatory by the back stairs  sneaking out by the fire escape like a thief .  he didn t dare risk the possibility of running into athor by going out the main way .  it was appalling to him to consider the possibility of seeing athor now  having to confront him face to face  man to man .  he found the motor scooter ride home a terrifying one .  at every moment he was afraid that the laws of gravity would cease to hold true  that he would go soaring off into the heavens .  but at last beenay reached the little apartment that he shared with raissta     .  she gasped when she saw him .   beenay .  you re white as a    ghost  yes .   he reached for her and pulled her close against him .   hold me   he said .   hold me .    what is it .  what happened .    i ll tell you later   he said .   just hold me .    theremon was at the six suns club a little after nine .  it was probably a good idea to get a head start on beenay  a quick drink or two first  just to lubricate his brain a little .  the astronomer had sounded awful as though he was keeping hysteria at bay only by some tremendous effort .  theremon couldn t imagine what terrible thing could have happened to him  there in the seclusion and stillness of the observatory  to make such a wreck out of him in so short a time .  but plainly beenay was in big trouble  and plainly he was going to need the highest quality help theremon could provide .   let me have a tano special   theremon told the waiter .   no  wait make it a double .  a tano sitha  okay .    double white light   the waiter said .   coming up .   the evening was mild .  theremon  who was well known here and received special treatment  had been given his regular warm weather table on the terrace overlooking the city .  the lights of downtown sparkled gaily .  onos had set an hour or two ago  and only trey and patru were in the sky  burning brightly in the east  casting harsh twin shadows as they made their descent toward morning .  looking at them  theremon wondered which suns would be in the sky tomorrow .  it was different all the time  a brilliant ever changing display .  onos  certainly you could always be sure of seeing onos at least part of the time every day of the year  even he knew that and then what .  dovim  tano  and sitha  to make it a four sun day .  he wasn t sure .  maybe it was supposed to be just tano and sitha  with onos visible only for a few hours at midday .  that would be gloomy .  but then  after a second sip  he reminded himself that this wasn t the season for short onos rises .  so it would be a three sun day  most likely  unless it was going to be just onos and dovim tomorrow .  it was so hard to keep it all straight  well  he could ask to see an almanac  if he really cared .  but he didn t .  some people always seemed to know what tomorrow s suns would be like beenay was one  naturally but theremon took a more happy go lucky approach to it all .  so long as some sun was going to be up there the next day  theremon didn t especially care which one it was .  and there always was one two or three  actually  or sometimes four .  you could count on that .  even five  once in a while .  his drink arrived .  he took a deep gulp and exhaled in pleasure .  what a delightful thing a tano special was .  the good strong white rum of the velkareen islands  mixed with a shot of the even stronger product  clear and tangy  that they distilled on the coast of bagilar  and just a dab of sgarrino juice to take the edge off ah  magnificent .  theremon wasn t a particularly heavy drinker  certainly not the way newspapermen were legendarily supposed to be  but he counted it a shabby day when he couldn t find time for one or two tano specials in those quiet dusky hours after onos had set .   you look like you re enjoying that  theremon   a familiar voice said behind him .   beenay .  you re early .    ten minutes .  what are you drinking .    the usual .  a tano special .    good .  i think i ll have one too .    you .   theremon stared at his friend .  fruit juice was about beenay s speed  so far as he knew .  he couldn t recall ever having seen the astronomer drink anything stronger .  but beenay looked strange this evening haggard  weary  worn .  his eyes had an almost feverish glow to them .   waiter .   theremon called .  it was alarming to see beenay gulp his drink .  he gasped after the first slug  as though the impact was a lot greater than he d been expecting  but then he went back to it quickly for a second deep pull  and a third .   easy   theremon urged .   your head ll be swimming in five minutes .    it s swimming already .    you had a drink before you came here .      no  not a drink   beenay said .   a shock .  an upset .   he put his drink down and peered balefully at the city lights .  after a moment he picked it up again  almost absent mindedly  and drained what was left .    i shouldn t have another one so soon  should i  theremon .    i doubt it very much .   theremon reached out and let his hand rest lightly on the astronomer s wrist .   what s going on  fellow .  tell me about it .    it s hard to explain .    come on .  i ve been around the track a little  you know .  you and raissta    no .  i told you before  this has nothing to do with her .  nothing .    all right .  i believe you .   beenay said   maybe i should have that second drink .    in a little while .  come on  beenay .  what is it .   beenay sighed .   you know what the theory of universal gravitation is  don t you  theremon .    of course i do .  i mean  i couldn t tell you what it means  exactly there are only twelve people on kalgash who truly understand it  isn t that so .  but i can certainly tell you what it is more or less .    so you believe that garbage too   beenay said  with a harsh laugh .   about the theory of gravitation being so complicated that only twelve people can understand its math .    that s what i ve always heard .    what you ve always heard is ignorant folk wisdom   said beenay .   i could give you all the essential math in a sentence  and you d probably understand what i was saying  too .    you could .  i would .    no question of it .  look  theremon  the law of universal gravitation the theory of universal gravitation  i mean  states that there exists a cohesive force among all bodies of the universe  such that the amount of this force between any two given bodies is proportional to the product of their masses divided by the square of the distance between them .  it s that simple .    that s all there is to it .    that s enough .  it took four hundred years to develop it .    why that long .  it seems simple enough  the way you put it .    because great laws aren t divined by flashes of inspiration  no matter what you newspaper people like to believe .  it usually takes the combined work of a worldful of scientists over a period of centuries .  ever since genovi    discovered that kalgash rotates around onos  rather than vice versa and that was about four centuries ago astronomers have been working on the problem of why all six of the suns appear and disappear in the sky as they do .  the complex motions of the six were recorded and analyzed and unwoven .  theory after theory was advanced and checked and counterchecked and modified and abandoned and revived and converted to something else .  it was a deuce of a job .   theremon nodded thoughtfully and finished off his drink .  he signaled the waiter for two more .  beenay seemed calm enough so long as he was talking about science  he thought .   it was some thirty years ago   the astronomer continued   that athor    put the touch of perfection on the whole thing by demonstrating that the theory of universal gravitation accounts exactly for the orbital motions of the six suns .  it was an amazing achievement .  it was one of the greatest feats of sheer logic anyone has ever accomplished .    i know how you revere that man   theremon said .   but what does all this have to do with    i m getting to the point .   beenay rose and walked to the edge of the terrace  carrying his second drink with him .  he stood there in silence for a time  looking out at distant trey and patru .  it seemed to theremon that beenay was growing agitated again .  but the newspaperman said nothing .  after a time beenay took a long gulp of his drink .  standing with his back still turned  he said finally   the problem is this .  a few months ago i began working on a recalculation of the motions of kalgash around onos  using the big new university computer .  i provided the computer with the last six weeks  actual observations of kalgash s orbit and told it to predict the orbital movements for the rest of the year .  i didn t expect any surprises .  mainly i just wanted an excuse to fool around with the computer  i guess .  naturally  i used the gravitational laws in setting up my calculations .   he swung around suddenly .  his face had a bleak  haunted look .   theremon  it didn t come out right .    i don t understand .    the orbit the computer produced didn t match up with the hypothetical orbit i was expecting to get .  i don t mean that i was simply working on the basis of a pure kalgash onos system  you realize .  i took into account all perturbations that the other suns would cause .  and what i got what the computer was claiming to be the true orbit of kalgash was something very different from the orbit that is indicated by athor s theory of gravitation .    but you said you used athor s gravitational laws in setting things up   said theremon  puzzled .   i did .    then how   suddenly theremon s eyes brightened .   good lord  man .  what a story .  are you telling me that the brand new supercomputer at saro university  installed at a cost of i don t want to think how many millions of credits  is inaccurate .  that there s been a gigantic scandalous waste of the taxpayers  money .  that    there s nothing wrong with the computer  theremon .  believe me .    can you be sure of that .    positive .    then what      i might have given the computer erroneous figures  maybe .  it s a terrific computer  but it can t get the right answer from the wrong data .      so that s why you re so upset  beenay .  listen  man  it s only human to make an error once in a while .  you mustn t be so harsh on yourself .  you    i needed to be completely certain that i had fed the right numbers into the computer  first of all  and also that i had given it the right theoretical postulates to use in processing those numbers   said beenay  clutching his glass so tightly that his hand shook .  the glass was empty now  theremon noticed .   as you say  it s only human to make an error once in a while .  so i called in a couple of hotshot young graduate students and let them work on the problem .  they had their results for me today .  that was the meeting i had that was so important  when i said i couldn t see you .  theremon  they confirmed my findings .  they got the same deviation in the orbit that i did .    but if the computer was right  then then   theremon shook his head .   then what .  the theory of universal gravitation is wrong .  is that what you re saying .    yes .   the word appeared to have come from beenay at a terrible price .  he seemed stunned  dazed  devastated .  theremon studied him .  no doubt this was confusing for beenay  and probably very embarrassing .  but the journalist still couldn t understand why the impact of all this on him was so powerful .  then abruptly he understood everything .   it s athor .  you re afraid of hurting athor  aren t you .    that s it exactly   said beenay  giving theremon a look of almost pathetic gratitude for having seen the true situation .  he threw himself down in his chair  shoulders hunched  head lowered .  in a muffled voice he said   it would kill the old man to know that someone s poked a hole in his wonderful theory .  that i  of all people  had poked a hole in it .  he s been like a second father to me  theremon .  everything i ve accomplished in the past ten years has been done under his guidance  with his encouragement  with with  well  his love  in a manner of speaking .  and now i repay it like this .  i wouldn t just be destroying his life s work i d be stabbing him  theremon  him .    have you considered simply suppressing your findings .   beenay looked astonished .   you know i couldn t do that .    yes .  yes  i do know .  but i had to find out whether you were thinking of it .    whether i was thinking of the unthinkable .  no  of course not .  it never entered my mind .  but what am i going to do  theremon .   i suppose i could just throw all the papers away and pretend i never looked into the whole subject .  but that would be monstrous .  so what it comes down to is  i have a choice between violating my own scientific conscience and ruining athor .  ruining the man i look upon not simply as the head of my profession but as my own philosophical mentor .    he can t have been much of a mentor  then .   the astronomer s eyes widened in astonishment and fury .   what are you saying  theremon .      easy .  easy .   theremon spread his hands wide in a conciliatory gesture .   it seems to me you re being awfully condescending to him  beenay .  if athor s really the great man you think he is  he s not going to put his own reputation above scientific truth .  do you see what i mean .  athor s theory is not cast iron .  no theory is and there is always room for improvement .  isn t that so .  science is constructed out of approximations that gradually approach the truth  you told me a long time back  and i ve never forgotten it .  well  that means all theories are subject to constant testing and modification  doesn t it .  and if it eventually turns out that they re not quite close enough to the truth  they need to be replaced by something that s closer .  right  beenay .  right .   beenay was trembling now .  he looked very pale .   could you get me another drink  theremon .    no .  listen to me  there s more .  you say that you re so worried about athor he s old  i suppose he s pretty frail that you don t have the heart to tell him you ve found a flaw in his theory .  all right .  that s a decent and loving position to take .  but think about this  will you .  if calculating the orbit of kalgash is all that important  somebody else is likely to stumble across the same flaw in athor s theory sooner or later  and that other person isn t likely to be as tactful in letting athor know about it as you d be .  he might even be a professional rival of athor s  an outright enemy of his every scientist has enemies  you ve told me so plenty of times .  wouldn t it be better for you to go to athor and tell him  gently  carefully  of what you ve discovered  than for him to find out about it one morning in the chronicle .    yes   beenay whispered .   you re completely right .    you ll go to him  then .    yes .  yes .  i have to  i suppose .   beenay bit his lip .   i feel miserable about this  theremon .  i feel like a murderer .    i know you do .  but it isn t athor you ll be murdering  it s a defective theory .  defective theories must never be allowed to persist .  you owe it to athor as well as yourself to let the truth emerge .   theremon hesitated .  a sudden startling new idea had occurred to him .   of course  there s one other possibility .  i m only a layman  you know  and you ll probably laugh .   is there any chance that the theory of gravitation might be correct despite everything  and that the computer s figures for kalgash s orbit are right also  and that some other factor entirely  something altogether unknown  might be responsible for the discrepancy in your result .    that could be  i suppose   said beenay in a flat  dispirited tone .   but once you begin dragging in mysterious unknown factors  you begin to move into the realm of fantasy .   i ll give you an example .  let s say there s an invisible seventh sun out there it s got mass  it exerts gravitational force  but we simply can t see it .  since we don t know it s there  we haven t plugged it into our gravitational calculations  and so the figures come out cockeyed .  is that what you mean .    well  why not .    why not five invisible suns  then .  why not fifty .  why not an invisible giant who pushed planets around according to his whims .  why not a huge dragon whose breath deflects kalgash from its proper path .  we can t disprove it  can we .  when you start in with why nots  theremon  anything becomes possible  and then nothing makes any sense .  at least not to me .  i can only deal with what i know is real .  you may be right that there s an unknown factor  and that therefore the gravitational laws aren t invalid .  i certainly hope so .  but i can t do serious work on that basis .  all i can do is go to athor  which i will  i promise you that  and tell him what the computer has told me .  i don t dare suggest to him or anybody that i blame the whole mess on a hitherto undiscovered  unknown factor .   otherwise i d sound just as crazy as the apostles of flame  who claim to know all sorts of mystic revelations .   theremon  i really want that other drink now .    yes .  all right .  and speaking of the apostles of flame    you want a statement from me  i remember .   beenay passed a hand wearily in front of his face .   yes .  yes .  i won t let you down .  you ve been a tremendous help to me this evening .  what is it exactly that the apostles have said now .  i forget .    it was mondior      said theremon .   the grand high mumbo jumbo himself .  what he said was let me think that the time is very near when the gods intend to purge the world of sin  that he can calculate the exact day  even the exact hour  when doom will arrive .   beenay groaned .   so what s new about that .  isn t that what they ve been saying for years .    yes  but they re starting to hand out more of the gory details now .  it s the notion of the apostles  you know  that this won t be the first time the world has been destroyed .  they teach that the gods have deliberately made mankind imperfect  as a test  and that they have given us a single year one of their divine years  not one of our little ones in which to shape up .  that s called a year of godliness  and it s exactly two thousand and forty nine of our years long .  again and again  when the year of godliness has ended  the gods have discovered that we re still wicked and sinful  and so they have destroyed the world by sending down heavenly flames from holy places in the sky that are known as stars .  so say the apostles  anyway .    stars .   beenay said .   does he mean the suns .    no  stars .  mondior says that the stars are specifically different from the six suns .   haven t you ever paid any attention to this stuff  beenay .    no .  why in the world should i .    well  in any event  when the year of godliness ends and nothing on kalgash has improved  morally speaking  these stars drop some sort of holy fire on us and burn us up .  mondior says this has happened any number of times .  but each time it does  the gods are merciful  or at least a faction among them is  every time the world is destroyed  the kinder gods prevail over the sterner ones and humanity is given one more chance .  and so the godliest of the survivors are rescued from the holocaust and a new deadline is set  mankind gets another two thousand and forty nine years to cast off its evil ways .  the time is almost up again  says mondior .  it s just under two thousand and forty eight years since the last cataclysm .  in something like fourteen months the suns will all disappear and these hideous stars of his will shoot flame down out of a black sky to wipe out the wicked .  next year on theptar nineteenth  to be specific .    fourteen months   beenay said in a musing way .   the nineteenth of theptar .  he s very precise about it  isn t he .  i suppose he knows the exact time of day it ll happen  too .    so he says  yes .  that s why i d like a statement from somebody connected with the observatory  preferably you .  mondior s latest announcement is that the exact time of the catastrophe can be calculated scientifically that it isn t simply something that s set forth as dogma in the book of revelations  but that it s subject to the same sort of computation that astronomers employ when when   theremon faltered and halted .   when we calculate the orbital motions of the suns and the world .   beenay asked acidly .   well  yes   theremon said  looking abashed .   then maybe there s hope for the world after all  if the apostles can t do any better job of it than we do .    i need a statement  beenay .    yes .  i realize that .   the next round of drinks had arrived .  beenay wrapped his hand around his glass .   try this   he said after a moment .    the main task of science is to separate truth from untruth  in the hope of revealing the way the universe really works .  putting truth to work in the service of untruth is not what we at the university think of as the scientific way .  we are capable now of predicting the movements of the suns in the heavens  yes but even if we use our best computer  we are no closer than we ever were to being able to foretell the will of the gods .  nor will we ever be  i suspect .    how s that .    perfect   theremon said .   let s see if i ve got it .   the main task of science is to separate truth from untruth  in the hope of of   what came next  beenay .   beenay repeated the whole thing word for word  as though he had memorized it hours before .  then he drained his third drink at a single astonishing long gulp .  and then he stood up  smiled for the first time all evening  and fell flat on his face .   athor    s eyes narrowed  and he scrutinized the little sheaf of printouts lying before him on his desk as though they were maps of continents that no one had ever known existed .  he was very calm .  he was amazed at how calm he was .   very interesting  beenay   he said slowly .   very  very interesting .    of course  sir  there s always the possibility that not only have i made some crucial error in fundamental assumptions  but that yimot and faro also    all three of you getting your basic postulates wrong .  no  beenay .  i think not .    i just wanted to indicate that the possibility exists .    please   athor said .   let me think .   it was midmorning .  onos in full glory blazed in the sky that was visible through the tall window of the observatory director s office .  dovim was barely apparent  a small hard red dot of light  making a high northerly transit .  athor fingered the papers  moving them about again and again on his desk .  and moved them yet again .  how strange to be taking this so easily  he thought .  beenay was the one who seemed all wrought up over it  he himself had scarcely reacted at all .  perhaps i m in shock  athor speculated .   over here  sir  i have the orbit of kalgash according to the generally accepted almanac computation .  and here  on the printout  we have the orbital prediction that the new computer    please  beenay .  i said i wanted to think .   beenay nodded jerkily .  athor smiled at him  not an easy thing for athor to do .  the formidable head of the observatory  a tall  thin  commanding looking man with an impressive shock of thick white hair  had allowed himself so long ago to slip into the role of austere giant of science that it was difficult for him to unbend and permit himself to show ordinary human responses .  at least  it was difficult for him while he was here at the observatory  where everyone looked upon him as a sort of demigod .  at home  with his wife  with his children  especially with his noisy flock of grandchildren  it was a different matter .  so universal gravitation wasn t quite right  was it .  no .  no  that was impossible .  every atom of common sense in him protested at the thought .  the concept of universal gravitation was fundamental to any comprehension of the structure of the universe  athor was certain .  athor knew .  it was too clean  too logical  too beautiful  to be wrong .  take universal gravitation away  and the entire logic of the cosmos dissolved into chaos .  inconceivable .  unimaginable .  but these figures this damnable printout of beenay s   i can see you re angry  sir .   beenay  chattering again .   and i want to tell you  i can quite understand it the way this must hit you anyone would be angry  having his life s work jeopardized this way    beenay    just let me say  sir  that i d give anything not to have had to bring you this today .  i know you re furious with me for coming in here with this  but i can only say that i thought long and hard before i did .  what i really wanted to do was burn everything and forget i ever got started on any of this .  i m appalled that i found what i did  and appalled that i was the one who    beenay   athor said again  in his most ominous voice .   sir .    i am furious with you  yes .  but not for the reason you think .    sir .    number one  i m annoyed at the way you ve been babbling at me  when all i want to do is sit here and quietly work through the implications of these papers you ve just tossed at me .  number two  and much more important  i m absolutely outraged that you d have hesitated for so much as a moment to bring me your findings .  why did you wait so long .    it was only yesterday that i finished double checking .    yesterday .  then you should have been in here yesterday .  do you really mean to say  beenay  that you seriously considered suppressing all this .  that you would simply have tossed your results away and said nothing .    no  sir   said beenay miserably .   i never actually thought about doing that .    well  that s a blessing .  tell me  man  do you think i m so enamored of my own beautiful theory that i d want one of my most gifted associates to shield me from the unpleasant news that the theory s got a flaw in it .    no  sir .  of course not .    then why didn t you come running in here with the news the moment you were sure you were right .      because because  sir   beenay looked as though he wanted to vanish into the carpet .   because i knew how upset you d be .  because i thought you might you might be so upset that your health would be affected .  so i held back  i talked to a couple of friends  i thought through my own position on all of this  and i came to see that i really had no choice  i had to tell you that the theory of univer    so you really do believe i love my own theory more than i do the truth  eh .    oh  no  no  sir .   again athor smiled  and this time it was no effort at all .   but i do  you know .  i m as human as anybody else  believe it or not .  the theory of universal gravitation brought me every scientific honor this planet has to offer .  it s my passport to immortality  beenay .  you know that .  and to have to deal with the possibility that the theory s wrong oh  it s a powerful shock  beenay  it goes right through me from front to back .  make no mistake about that .   of course  i still believe that my theory s correct .    sir .   said beenay  all too obviously aghast .   but i ve checked and checked and checked again  and    oh  your findings are correct too  i m sure of that .  for you and faro and yimot all to have done it wrong no  no  i ve already said i don t see much chance of that .  but what you ve got here doesn t necessarily overthrow universal gravitation .   beenay blinked a few times .   it doesn t .    certainly not   athor said  warming to the situation .  he felt almost cheerful now .  the deathly unreal calm of the first few moments had given way to the very different tranquillity that one feels when one is in pursuit of truth .   what does the theory of universal gravitation say  after all .  that every body in the universe exerts a force on all other bodies  proportional to mass and distance .  and what did you attempt to do in using universal gravitation to compute the orbit of kalgash .  why  to factor in the gravitational impact that all the various astronomical bodies exert on our world as it travels around onos .  is that not so .    yes  sir .    well  then  there s no need to throw the theory of universal gravitation out  at least not at this point .  what we need to do  my friend  is simply to rethink our comprehension of the universe  and determine whether we re ignoring something that should be figured into our calculations some mysterious factor  that is  which all unbeknownst to us is exerting gravitational force on kalgash and isn t being taken into account .   beenay s eyebrows rose alarmingly .  he gaped at athor in what could only have been a look of total astonishment .  then he began to laugh .  he smothered it at first by clamping his jaws  but the laughter insisted on escaping anyway  causing him to hunch his shoulders and emit strangled lurching coughs  and then he had to clap both his hands over his mouth to hold back the torrent of merriment .  athor watched  flabbergasted .   an unknown factor .   beenay blurted  after a moment .   a dragon in the sky .  an invisible giant .    dragons .  giants .  what are you talking about  boy .    yesterday evening theremon     oh  sir  i m sorry  i m really sorry   beenay struggled to regain his self control .  muscles writhed in his face  he blinked violently and caught his breath  he turned away for an instant  and when he turned back he was almost himself again .  shamefacedly he said   i had a couple of drinks with theremon     yesterday evening the newspaper columnist  you know and told him something about what i d found  and how uneasy i was about bringing my findings to you .    you went to a newspaperman .    a very trustworthy one .  a close friend .    they re all scoundrels  beenay .  believe me .    not this one  sir .  i know him  and i know he d never do anything to hurt me or offend me .  in fact theremon gave me some excellent advice  by which i mean he said i absolutely had to come here  which is why i did .  but also trying to offer me some hope  you see  some consolation he said the same thing you did  that maybe there was an  unknown factor  his exact phrase  an unknown factor that was confusing our understanding of kalgash s orbit .  and i laughed and told him that it was useless to drag unknown factors into the situation  that it was too easy a solution .  i suggested sarcastically  of course  that if we allowed any such hypothesis  then we might as well tell ourselves that it was an invisible giant that was pushing kalgash out of orbit  or the breath of a giant dragon .  and now here you are  sir  taking the same line of reasoning not a layman like theremon  but the greatest astronomer in the world .  do you see how foolish i feel  sir .    i think i do   said athor .  all this was becoming a little trying .  he ran his hand through his imposing white mane and gave beenay a look of mingled irritation and compassion .   you were right to tell your friend that inventing fantasies to solve a problem isn t very useful .  but the random suggestions of laymen aren t always without merit .  for all we know  there is some unknown factor at work on kalgash s orbit .  we need at least to consider that possibility before we toss the theory overboard .  i think what we need to do here is to make use of thargola s sword .  you know what that is  beenay .    of course  sir .  the principle of parsimony .  first put forth by the medieval philosopher thargola     who said   we must drive a sword through any hypothesis that is not strictly necessary   or words to that effect .    very good  beenay .  though the way i was taught it  it s  if we are offered several hypotheses  we should begin our considerations by striking the most complex of them with our sword .   here we have the hypothesis that the theory of universal gravitation is in error  versus the hypothesis that you ve left out some unknown and perhaps unknowable factor in making your calculations of the orbit of kalgash .  if we accept the first hypothesis  then everything we think we know about the structure of the universe tumbles into chaos .  if we accept the second one  all we need to do is locate the unknown factor  and the fundamental order of things is preserved .  it s a lot simpler to try to find something we may have overlooked than it would be to come up with a new general law governing the movements of heavenly bodies .  so the hypothesis that the theory of gravitation is wrong falls before thargola s sword and we begin our investigations by working with the simpler explanation of the problem .  eh  beenay .  what do you say .   beenay looked radiant .   then i haven t overthrown universal gravitation after all .    not yet  anyway .  you ve probably won a place in scientific history for yourself  but we don t know yet whether it s as a debunker or as an originator .  let s pray it s the latter .  and now we need to do some very hard thinking  young man .   athor    closed his eyes and rubbed his forehead  which was beginning to ache .  it had been a long time since he d done any real science  he realized .  he d occupied himself almost entirely with administrative matters at the observatory for the past eight or ten years .  but the mind that had produced the theory of universal gravitation might yet have a thought or two left in it  he told himself .    first  i want to take a closer look at these calculations of yours   he said .   and then  i suppose  a closer look at my own theory .        the headquarters of the apostles of flame was a slender but magnificent tower of gleaming golden stone  rising like a shining javelin above the seppitan river  in the exclusive birigam quarter of saro city .  that soaring tower  theremon thought  must be one of the most valuable pieces of real estate in the entire capital .  he had never stopped to consider it before  but the apostles had to be an exceedingly wealthy group .  they owned their own radio and television stations  they published magazines and newspapers  they had this tremendous tower .  and probably they controlled all sorts of other assets too that were less visibly theirs .  he wondered how that was possible .  a bunch of fanatic puritan monks .  where would they have managed to get their hands on so many hundreds of millions of credits .  but  he realized  such well known industrialists as bottiker     and vivin    were outspoken adherents of the teachings of mondior and his apostles .  it wouldn t surprise him to know that men like bottiker and vivin  and others like them  were heavy contributors to the apostles  treasury .  and if the organization was even a tenth as old as it claimed to be ten thousand years  was what they said .  and if it had invested its money wisely over the centuries  there was no telling what the apostles could have achieved through the miracle of compound interest  theremon thought .  they might be worth billions .  they might secretly own half of saro city .  it was worth looking into  he told himself .  he entered the vast  echoing entrance hall of the great tower and peered about in awe .  though he had never been here before  he had heard it was an extraordinarily lavish building both inside and out .  but nothing he had heard had prepared him for the reality of the cultist s building .  a polished marble floor  with inlays in half a dozen brilliant colors  stretched as far as he could see .  the walls were covered with glittering golden mosaics in abstract patterns  rising to arched vaults high overhead .  chandeliers of woven gold and silver threw a shimmering shower of brightness over everything .  at the opposite end from the entrance theremon saw what seemed to be a model of the whole universe  fashioned  apparently  entirely of precious metals and gems  immense suspended globes  which seemed to represent the six suns  hung from the ceiling by invisible wires .  each of them cast an eerie light  a golden beam from the largest of them  which must be onos  and a dim red glow from the dovim globe  and cold hard blue white from the tano sitha pair  and a gentler white light from patru and trey .  a seventh globe that must be kalgash moved slowly among them like a drifting balloon  its own colors changing as the shifting pattern of the suns  light played over its surface .    as theremon stood gaping in astonishment  a voice coming from nowhere in particular said   may we have your name .    i m theremon     .  i have an appointment with mondior .    yes .  please enter the chamber on your immediate left  theremon     .   he saw no chamber on his immediate left .  but then a segment of the mosaic covered wall slid noiselessly open  revealing a small oval room  more an antechamber than a chamber .  green velvet hangings covered the walls and a single bar of amber light provided illumination .  he shrugged and stepped in .  at once the door closed behind him and he felt a distinct sensation of motion .  this wasn t a room  it was a lift .  yes  he was rising  he was certain of it .  up and up and up he went  in a very unhurried way .  it took half an eternity before the lift chamber came to a halt and the door slid open once again .  a black robed figure was waiting for him .   would you come this way  please .   a narrow hallway led a short distance into a kind of waiting room  where a large portrait of mondior    occupied most of one entire wall .  as theremon entered  the portrait seemed to light up  coming strangely to life and glowing  so that mondior s dark  intense eyes looked straight at him and the high apostle s stern face took on a luminous inner radiance that made him seem almost beautiful  in a fierce sort of way .  theremon met the portrait s gaze coolly enough .  but even the tough minded newspaperman found himself ever so slightly unnerved to think that very shortly he would be interviewing this very person .  mondior on radio or television was one thing  just some crazed preacher with an absurd message to peddle .  but mondior in the flesh awesome  hypnotic  mysterious  if this portrait was any indication might be something else again .  theremon warned himself to be on his guard .  the black robed monk said   if you ll step inside  please   the wall just to the left of the portrait opened .  an office became visible within  as sparsely decorated as a cell  nothing in it but a bare desk made of a single slab of polished stone and a low backless chair  cut from a chunk of some unusual red streaked gray wood  placed in front of it .  behind the desk sat a man of obvious force and authority  wearing the black apostles  robe with red trim along the hood .  he was very impressive .  but he wasn t mondior    .  mondior  judging by his photographs and the way he seemed on television  had to be a man of sixty five or seventy  with a kind of intense masculine force about him .  his hair was thick and wavy  black with broad streaks of white  and he had a full  fleshy face  a wide mouth  a strong nose  heavy jet black eyebrows  dark  compelling eyes .  but this one was young  surely not yet forty  and though he seemed powerful and highly masculine too  it was in an entirely different way  he was very thin  with a sharp  narrow face and tight  pursed lips .  his hair  curling down over his forehead under his hood  was a strange brick red color  and his eyes were a cold  unrelenting blue .  no doubt this man was some high functionary in the organization .  but theremon s appointment was with mondior .  he had decided just this morning  after writing his story on the apostles  latest fulmination  that he needed to know more about this mysterious cult .  everything they had ever said struck him as nonsense  of course  but it was beginning to seem like interesting nonsense  worth writing about in some detail .  how better to learn more about them than to go straight to the top man .  assuming that was possible  that is .  but to his surprise they had told him  when he called  that he could have an audience with mondior    that very day .  it had seemed too easy .  now he began to realize that it had been too easy .   i am folimun      the sharp faced man said in a light  flexible voice with none of mondior s compelling thunder .  yet it was  theremon suspected  the voice of someone who was accustomed to being obeyed .   i am the public relations adjutant for the home district of our organization .  it will be my pleasure to answer any questions you may have .    my appointment was with mondior himself   theremon said .  folimun    s chilly eyes betrayed no sign of surprise .   you may think of me as the voice of mondior .    i understood it would be a personal audience .    it is .  anything said to me is shared with mondior  anything that comes from me is the word of mondior .  this should be understood .    nevertheless  i was given assurances that i d be allowed to talk with mondior .  i have no doubt that what you tell me would be authoritative  but it isn t just informition that i m looking for .  i d like to form some opinion of what sort of man mondior is  what his views are on other things besides the prophesied destruction of the world  what he thinks about    i can only repeat what i have already said   folimun declared  cutting in smoothly .   you may think of me as the voice of mondior .  his serenity will not be able to see you in person today .    then i would prefer to return on another day  when his serenity will be    permit me to inform you that mondior does not make himself available for personal interviews  not ever .  not ever .  his serenity s work is much too urgent  now that only a matter of months stands between us and the time of flame .   folimun smiled suddenly  an unexpectedly warm and human smile  perhaps intended to take some of the sting out of the refusal and out of that melodramatic sounding phrase   the time of flame .   almost gently he said   i would guess that there s been a misunderstanding  that you didn t realize that your appointment would be with a spokesman for mondior rather than with the high apostle himself .  but that s the way it must be .  if you don t wish to speak with me  well  i regret that you ve wasted your trip today .  but i m the most useful source of information you re going to be able to find here  now or at any other time .   again the smile .  it was the smile of a man who was coolly and unapologetically closing a door in theremon s face .   very well   theremon said after a moment or two of consideration .   i see i don t have much choice .  i get you or i get nobody .  all right  let s talk .  how much time do i have .    as much as you need  though this first meeting will have to be a fairly brief one .  and also  a grin  a surprising one  almost mischievous  you must bear in mind that we have only fourteen months altogether .  and i ve got a few other things to do during that time .    so i imagine .  fourteen months  you say .  and then what .    you haven t read the book of revelations  then  i assume .    not recently  actually .    permit me  then .   folimun produced a thin red bound volume from some crevice of his apparently empty desk and slid it toward theremon .   this is for you .  you ll find much nourishment in it  i hope .  meanwhile i can summarize the theme that appears to be of the greatest interest to you .  very shortly  exactly four hundred and eighteen days from now  to be extremely precise  on the nineteenth of theptar next a great transformation will come over our comfortable  familiar world .  the six suns will enter the cave of darkness and disappear  the stars will make themselves manifest to us  and all kalgash will be set ablaze .   he made it sound very casual .  as though he might be talking about the coming of a rainstorm tomorrow afternoon  or the expected blossoming of some rare plant next week in the municipal botanical garden .  all kalgash set ablaze .  the six suns entering the cave of darkness .  the stars .   the stars   theremon said aloud .   and what  in fact  may they be .    they are the instruments of the gods .    can you be more specific  do you think .    the nature of the stars will be made more than amply clear to us   said folimun      in a matter of four hundred and eighteen days .    when the current year of godliness comes to its end   said theremon .   on theptar nineteenth of next year .   folimun looked pleasantly surprised .   so you have been studying our teachings .    to some extent .  i ve listened to mondior s recent speeches  at any rate .  i know about the two thousand and forty nine year cycle .   and the event you call the time of flame .  i suppose you can t provide me with any sort of advance description of that  either .    you ll find something along those lines in the fifth chapter of the book of revelations .  no  you needn t search for it now  i can quote it for you .   from the stars there then reached down the heavenly flames  that was the bearer of the will of the gods  and where the flames touched  the cities of kalgash were consumed even to utter destruction  so that of man and the works of man nothing whatever remained .    theremon nodded .   a sudden terrible cataclysm .  why .    the will of the  gods .  they have warned us against our wickedness and have given us a span of years in which to redeem ourselves .  that span is what we call the year of godliness  a  year  two thousand and forty nine huma n years long  about which you already appear to know .  the current year of godliness is nearly at its end .    and then we ll all be wiped out  you think .    not all of us .  but most will  and our civilization will be destroyed .  those few who survive will face the immense task of rebuilding .  this is  as you seem already to be aware  a melancholy repetitive cycle in human events .  what is soon due to occur will not be the first time that mankind has failed the test of the gods .  we have been struck down more than once before  and now we are on the verge of being struck down yet again .   the curious thing  theremon thought  was that folimun didn t seem at all crazy .  except for his odd robe  he could have been any sort of youngish businessman sitting in his handsome office a loan applications officer  for instance  or an investment banker .  he was obviously intelligent .  he spoke clearly and well  in a crisp  direct tone .  he neither ranted nor raved .  but the things he was saying  in his crisp  direct way  were the wildest sort of nonsensical babble .  the contrast between what folimun said and the way he said it was hard to take .  now he sat quietly  looking relaxed  waiting for the newspaperman to ask the next question .   i ll be frank   theremon said after a little while .   like many people  i have difficulty accepting something this big which is handed to me simply as a revelation .  i need solid proofs .  but you don t show us any .  take it on faith  you say .  there s no tangible evidence to demonstrate  of course  that s what you tell us  but we d all better just believe what you re offering us  because you ve heard all this from the gods  and you know the gods aren t lying to you .  can you show me why i should believe you  though .  faith alone isn t enough for people like me .    why do you think there is no evidence .   folimun asked .   is there .  other than the book of revelations itself .  circular evidence isn t evidence to me .    we are a very ancient organization  you know .    ten thousand years old  so the story goes .   a brief flickering smile crossed folimun s thin lips .   an arbitrary figure  perhaps exaggerated somewhat for popular effect .  all that we claim among ourselves is that we go back to prehistoric times .    so your group is at least two thousand years old  then .    a little more than that  at the minimum .  we can trace ourselves back to a time before the last cataclysm so we are certainly more than two thousand and forty nine years old .  probably much more  but we have no proof of that  at least not proof of the sort which you d be likely to accept .  we think the apostles may go back several cycles of destruction  which is to say possibly as much as six thousand years .  all that really matters is that we are precataclysmic in origin .  we have been quietly active as an organization for more than one year .  of godliness .  and so we are in possession of information giving highly specific details of the catastrophe that lies in store for us .  we know what will happen because we are aware of what has happened many times before .    but you won t show anyone the information you claim to have .  the evidence  the proofs .    the book of revelations is what we offer the world .   round and round and round .  this was leading nowhere .  theremon began to feel restless .  it was all a big bluff  obviously .  all a cynical fake  probably designed to pull in fat contributions from the gullible likes of bottiker and vivin and other wealthy folk desperate to buy their way into escaping the threat of doom .  despite folimun s obvious appearance of sincerity and intelligence  he had to be either a willing co conspirator in this gigantic enterprise of fraudulent fantasy  or else merely one of mondior s many dupes .   all right   the newspaperman said .   let s assume for the time being that there will be some sort of worldwide catastrophe next year  of which your group has advance detailed knowledge .  what is it  exactly  that you want the rest of us to do .  go flocking into your chapels and beg the gods to have mercy on us .    it s much too late for that .    there s no hope at all  then .  in that case  why are you bothering even to warn us .   folimun smiled again  without irony this time .   for two reasons .  one  yes  we do want people to come to our chapels  not so that they can try to influence the gods  but so that they can listen to our teachings in so far as they concern matters of morality and everyday decency .  we think we have a message that is of value to the world in those areas .  but second  and more urgent  we want to convince people of the reality of what is coming  so that they will take measures to protect themselves against it .  the worst of the catastrophe can be headed off .  steps can be taken to avert the complete destruction of our civilization .  the flames are inevitable  yes  human nature being what it is the gods have spoken  the time of their vengeance is already on the way but within the general madness and horror there will be some who survive .  i assure you that we apostles most definitely will .  we will be here  as we have been before  to lead humanity into the new cycle of rebirth .  and we offer our hand in love  in charity  to anyone else who will accept it .  who will join with us in guarding themselves against the turmoil that is coming .  does that sound like madness to you  theremon .  does that sound as though we re dangerous crackpots .    if i could only accept your basic assumption    that the flames will come next year .  you will .  you will .  what remains to be seen is whether you accept it long enough in advance to become one of the survivors  one of the guardians of our heritage  or discover only in the moment of destruction  in the moment of your own agony  that we were speaking the truth all along .    i wonder which it ll be   said theremon .   permit me to hope that you ll be on our side on the day that this year of godliness comes to its close   folimun said .  abruptly he rose and offered theremon his hand .   i have to go now .  his serenity the high apostle expects me in a few minutes .  but we ll have further conversations  of that i m sure .  a day s notice  or less  perhaps i ll try to make myself available to you .  i look forward to speaking with you again .  odd as this may sound  i feel that you and i are destined to work very closely together .  we have much in common  you know .    do we .    in the matter of faith  no .  in the matter of the desire to survive and to help others to survive yes  i think so  very definitely .  a time will come when you and i will seek each other out  i suspect  and join forces to fight against the darkness that is coming .  i m certain of it  in fact .   sure  theremon thought .  i d better go get fitted for my black robe right away .  but there was no sense in offending folimun with any sort of rudeness .  this cult of apostles was growing  apparently  day by day .  there was a big story here  and folimun was probably the one he was going to have to depend on for most of it .  theremon slipped the copy of the book of revelations into his briefcase and stood up .   i ll call you in a few weeks   he said .   after i ve had a chance to peruse this with some care .  there ll be other things i ll want to ask you then .   and how far in advance do i need to call for an audience with mondior    .   folimun couldn t be snared so simply .   as i ve already explained  his serenity s work from here until the time of flame is so critical that he ll be unable to make himself available for such things as personal interviews .  i m truly sorry .  there s no way i can alter that .   folimun put out his hand .   it s been a pleasure .    and for me   said theremon .  folimun laughed .   has it  really .  to spend half an hour talking with a madman .  a crackpot .  a fanatic .  a cultist .    i don t remember using those words .    it wouldn t amaze me to be told that you d thought them  though .   the apostle gave theremon another of his curiously disarming smiles .   you d be half right  anyway .  i am a fanatic .  and a cultist  i suppose .  but not a madman .  not a crackpot .  i only wish i were .  and you will too .   he waved theremon out .  the monk who had guided him in was waiting outside the door to take him to the lift chamber .  a strange half hour  the newspaperman thought .  and not very fruitful  really .  in some ways he knew even less about the apostles than he had before he had come here .  that they were cranks and superstition mongers was still obvious to theremon .  plainly they didn t have a shred of anything like real evidence that some gigantic cataclysm was in store for the world soon .  whether they were mere self deluding fools  though  or outright frauds looking to line their own pockets  was something that he could not yet clearly decide .  it was all pretty confusing .  there was an element of fanaticism  of puritanism  about their movement that was not at all to his liking .  and yet  and yet  .   .   .  this folimun  this spokesman of theirs  had seemed an unexpectedly attractive person .  he was intelligent  articulate even  in his way  rational .  the fact that he appeared to have a sense of humor of sorts was a surprise  and a point in his favor .  theremon had never heard of a maniac who was capable of even the slightest self mockery  or a fanatic  either .   unless it was all part of folimun s publicrelations act  unless folimun had been deliberately projecting the kind of persona that someone like theremon would be likely to find appealing .  be careful  he told himself .  folimun wants to use you .  but that was all right .  his position with the newspaper was an influential one .  everyone wanted to use him .  well  theremon thought  we ll see who uses whom .  his footsteps echoed sharply as he walked at a brisk pace through the immense entrance hall of the apostles  headquarters and out into the brilliance of a three sun afternoon .  back to the chronicle office now .  a couple of pious hours devoted to a close study of the book of revelations  and then it was time to begin thinking about tomorrow s column .   the summer rainy season was in full spate the afternoon sheenin     returned to saro city .  the plump psychologist stepped out of the plane into a stupendous downpour that had turned the airfield into something close to a lake .  gray torrents of rain rode almost horizontally on fierce gusts of wind .  gray gray everything gray  the suns had to be up there somewhere in all that murk .  that faint glimmer in the west was probably onos  and there were hints of the chilly light of tano and sitha off the other way .  but the cloud cover was so thick that the day was disagreeably dark .  uncomfortably dark for sheerin  who still  despite what he had told his hosts in jonglor was troubled by the aftereffects of his fifteen minute ride through the tunnel of mystery .  he would have gone on a ten day fast sooner than he d admit it to kelaritan and cubello and the rest of those people .  but he had come perilously close to the danger point in there .  for three or four days thereafter sheerin had experienced a touch  only a touch  of the kind of claustrophobia that had sent so many citizens of jonglor to the mental hospital .  he would be in his hotel room  working on his report  when suddenly he would feel darkness closing in on him  and he would find it necessary to get up and go out on his terrace  or even to leave the building entirely for a long stroll in the hotel garden .  necessary .  well  maybe not .  but preferable .  certainly preferable .  and he always felt better for doing it .  or he would be asleep and the darkness would come to him then .  naturally the godlight would be on in his room when he slept he always slept with one on  he knew nobody who didn t and since the tunnel ride he had taken to using an auxiliary godlight too  in case the battery of the first one should fail  though the indicator clearly said it had six months  power left .  even so  sheerin s sleeping mind would become convinced that his room had been plunged into the depths of lightlessness  utterly black  the true and complete darkness .  and he would awaken  trembling  sweating  convinced he was in darkness even though the friendly glow of the two godlights was right there on either side of him to tell him that he was not .  so now  to step from his plane into this somber twilight landscape well  he was glad to be home  but he would have preferred a sunnier arrival .  he had to fight off mild distress  or perhaps not so mild  as he entered the flexiglass foul weather passageway that led from his plane to the terminal .  he wished they hadn t put the passageway up .  better not to be enclosed right now  sheerin thought  even if it did mean getting wet .  better to be out there under the open sky  under the comforting light  however faint just now  however hidden by clouds  of the friendly suns .  but the queasiness passed .  by the time he had claimed his baggage  the cheering reality of being back home again in saro city had triumphed over the lingering effects of his brush with darkness .  liliath     was waiting for him outside the baggage pickup area with her car .  that made him feel better too .  she was a slender  pleasant looking woman in her late forties  a fellow member of the psychology department  though her work was experimental  animals in mazes  no overlap at all with his .  they had known each other ten or fifteen years .  sheerin would probably have asked her to marry him long ago if he had been the marrying type .  but he wasn t  nor  for all the indication she had ever given him  was she .  still  the relationship they did have seemed to suit them both .   of all the miserable days to pick for coming home   he said  as he slipped in beside her and reached across to give her a quick friendly kiss .   it s been like this for three days .  and they say we re in for three more of it  until next onos day .  we ll all be drowned by then  i suppose .   you look as if you ve lost some weight up there in jonglor  sheerin .    have i .  well  you know  northern food not really to my taste   he hadn t expected that it would be so apparent .  a man of his girth ought to be able to drop ten or fifteen pounds without its being noticeable at all .  but liliath had always had sharp eyes .  and perhaps he had dropped more than ten or fifteen pounds .  ever since the tunnel  he had simply pecked at his food .  him .  it was hard for him to believe how little he had eaten .   you look good   she said .   healthy .  vigorous .    do i .    not that i think you need to be skinny  not at this late date .  but it can t hurt to take a little off .  so you enjoyed yourself in jonglor .    well    get to see the exposition .    yes .  fabulous .   he couldn t muster much enthusiasm .   my god  this rain  liliath .    it wasn t raining in jonglor .    clear and dry all the time .  the way it was when i left saro .    well  seasons change  sheerin .  you can t hope to have the same weather for six months at a stretch  you know .  with a different set of suns in the ascendant every day  we can t expect the patterns of climate to hold still very long .    i can t tell whether you sound more like a meteorologist or an astrologer   sheerin said .   neither .  i sound like a psychologist .   aren t you going to tell me anything about your trip  sheerin .   he hesitated .   the exposition was very fine .  i m sorry you missed it .  but most of the time i was hard at work .  they ve got a real mess on their hands up north  this tunnel of mystery thing .    is it really true that people have been dying in it .    a few .  but mainly they ve been coming out traumatized  disoriented .  claustrophobic .  i spoke with some of the victims .  they ll be months recovering .  for some it ll be permanent disability .  and even so the tunnel stayed open for weeks .    after the problems began .    nobody seemed to care .  least of all the people who run the exposition .  they were just interested in selling tickets .  and the fairgoers were curious about darkness .  curious about darkness  can you imagine that  liliath .  they lined up eagerly to put their minds in jeopardy .  of course  they were all convinced that nothing bad was going to happen to them .  and nothing bad did  to a lot of them .  but not all .   i took a ride in the tunnel myself .    you did .   she said  sounding astonished .   what was it like .    a nasty business .  i d pay a good deal not to have to do it again .    but obviously you came out all right .    obviously   he said carefully .   i might come out all right if i swallowed half a dozen live fish  too .  but it s not something i d be likely to want to repeat .  i told them to shut their damned tunnel down .  that was my professional opinion  and i think they re going to abide by it .  we simply weren t designed to withstand that much darkness  liliath .  a minute  two minutes  maybe then we start to snap .  it s an innate thing  i m convinced of it  millions of years of evolution shaping us to be what we are .  darkness is the most unnatural thing in the world .  and the idea of selling it to people as entertainment   he shuddered .   well  i ve had my trip to jonglor  and now i m back .  what s been going on at the university .    nothing much   liliath replied .   the usual stupid little squabbles  the usual faculty meetings  lofty declarations of outrage over this and that burning social issue you know .   she fell silent for a moment  both hands clinging to the steering stick as she guided the car through deep pools of water that flooded the highway .   there s apparently some sort of fuss over at the observatory  by the way .  your friend beenay    came around looking for you .  he didn t tell me very much  but it seems they re having a big reevaluation of one of their key theories .  everybody s in an uproar .  old athor himself is leading the research  can you imagine it .  i thought his mind had ossified a century ago .   beenay had some newspaperman with him  somebody who writes a popular column .  theremon  i think that was his name .  theremon     .  i didn t care for him much .    he s very well known .  something of a firebrand  i think  though i m not exactly sure what kind of causes he fulminates about .  he and beenay spend a lot of time together .   sheerin made a mental note to call the young astronomer after he had unpacked .  for close to a year now beenay had been living with sheerin s sister s girl  raissta      and sheerin had struck up a close friendship with him  as close as was possible considering the difference of twenty odd years in their ages .  sheerin had an amateur s interest in astronomy  that was one of the bonds that drew them together .  athor back doing theoretical work .  imagine that .  what could it all be about .  had some upstart published a paper attacking the law of universal gravitation .  no  sheerin thought nobody would dare .   and you .   sheerin asked .   you haven t said a word about what you did all the time i was away .    what do you think i did  sheerin .  go power soaring in the mountains .  attend meetings of the apostles of flame .  take a course in political science .  i read books .  i taught my classes .  i ran my experiments .  i waited for you to come home .  i planned the dinner i d cook when you did come home .   you re sure you aren t on a diet  now .    of course not .   he let his hand rest fondly on hers for a moment .   i thought about you all the time  liliath .    i m sure you did .    and i can hardly wait for dinnertime .    at least that much sounds plausible .   the rain suddenly grew even more dense .  a great swolloping mass of it struck the windshield and it was all liliath could do to keep the car on the road  though she managed it .  they were going past the pantheon  the magnificent cathedral of all the gods .  it didn t seem quite so magnificent now  with rivers of rain sluicing down its brick facade .  the sky darkened another degree or two in the worsening storm .  sheerin cringed away from the blackness outside and looked toward the brightly lit controls of the car s dashboard for comfort .  he didn t want to be in the enclosed space of the car any more .  he wanted to be outside in the open fields  storm or no storm .  but that was crazy .  he d be soaked in an instant out there .  he might even drown  the puddles were so deep .  think happy thoughts  he told himself .  think warm bright thoughts .  think about sunshine  the golden sunshine of onos  the warm light of patru and trey  even the chilly light of sitha and tano  the faint red light of dovim .  think about this evening s dinner .  liliath has made a feast for you to welcome you back .  she s such a good cook  liliath is .  he realized that he still wasn t hungry at all .  not on a miserable gray day like this so dark so dark  but liliath was very sensitive about her cooking .  especially when she cooked for him .  he d eat everything she put before him  he resolved  even if he had to force himself .  a funny notion  he thought  he  sheerin  the great gourmand  thinking about forcing himself to eat .  liliath glanced toward him at the sound of his laughter .   what s so funny .    i ah that athor should be back doing research again   he said hastily .   after having been content so long with being the lord high emperor of astronomy and doing purely administrative stuff .  i ll have to call beenay right away .  what in the world can be going on over at the observatory .    this was siferra    s third day back at saro university  and it hadn t stopped raining yet .  q ite a refreshing contrast to the bone dry desert environment of the sagikan peninsula .  she hadn t seen rain in so long that she found herself wonderstruck at the whole idea that water could fall from the skies .  in sagikan  every drop of water was enormously precious .  you calculated its use with the greatest precision and recycled whatever was recyclable .  now here it was  pouring down out of the heavens as though from a gigantic reservoir that could never run dry .  siferra felt a powerful urge to strip her clothes off and sprint across the great green lawns of the campus  letting the rainfall flow down her body in an unending delicious stream to wash her clean at last of the infernal desert dust .  that was all they d need to see .  that cool  aloof  unromantic professor of archaeology  siferra     running naked in the rain .  it would be worth doing if only to enjoy the sight of their astounded faces peering out of every window of the university as she went flying past .  not very likely  though  siferra thought .  not my style at all .  and there was too much to do  really .  she hadn t wasted any time getting down to work .  most of the artifacts she had excavated at the beklimot site were following along by cargo ship and wouldn t be here for many weeks .  but there were charts to arrange  sketches to finish  balik s stratigraphic photographs to analyze  the soil samples to prepare for the radiography lab  a million and one things to do .   and then  too  there were the thombo tablets to discuss with mudrin     of the department of paleography .  the thombo tablets .  the find of finds  the premier discovery of the entire year and a half .  or so she felt .  of course  it all depended on whether anyone could make any sense out of them .  at any rate  she would waste no time getting mudrin working on them .  at the least  the tablets were fascinating things  but they might be much more than that .  there was the possibility that they might revolutionize the entire study of the prehistoric world .  that was why she hadn t entrusted them to the freight shippers  but had carried them back from sagikan in her own hands .  a knock at the door .   siferra .  siferra  are you there .    come on in  balik .   the broad shouldered stratigrapher was soaking wet .   this foul abominable rain   he muttered  shaking himself off .   you wouldn t believe how drenched i got just crossing the quad from uland library to here .    i love the rain   siferra said .   i hope it never stops .  after all those months baking out in the desert the sand in your eyes all the time  the dust in your throat  the heat  the dryness no  let it rain  balik .    but i see you re keeping yourself indoors .  it s a whole lot easier to appreciate rain when you re looking at it from a nice dry office .   playing with your tablets again  are you .   he indicated the six ragged  battered slabs of hard red clay that siferra had arranged atop her desk in two groups of three  the square ones in one row and the oblong ones below them .   aren t they beautiful .   siferra said exultantly .   i can t leave them alone .  i keep staring at them as if they ll suddenly become intelligible if only i look at them long enough .   balik leaned forward and shook his head .   chickenscratches .  that s all it looks like to me .    come on .  i ve already identified distinct word patterns   siferra said .   and i m no paleographer .  here look you see this group of six characters here .  it repeats over here .  and these three  with the wedges setting them off    has mudrin seen them yet .    not yet .  i ve asked him to stop by a little later .    you know that word has gotten out about what we ve found  don t you .  the successive thombo town sites .   siferra looked at him in amazement .   what .  who  .    one of the students   balik said .   i don t know who it was veloran  is my guess  though eilis thinks it was sten .  i suppose it was unavoidable  don t you .    i warned them not to say anything to    yes  but they re kids  siferra  only kids  nineteen years old and on their first important dig .  and the expedifion stumbles on something utterly astounding seven previously unknown prehistoric cities one on top of the next  going back the gods only know how many thousands of years    nine cities  balik .    seven  nine  it s colossal either way .  and i think it s seven .   balik smiled .   i know you do .  you re wrong .   but who s been talking about it .  in the department  i mean .    hilliko .  and brangin .  i heard them this morning  in the faculty lounge .  they re extremely skeptical  i have to tell you .  passionately skeptical .  neither one of them thinks it s even remotely possible for there to be even one settlement older than beklimot at that site  let alone nine  or seven  or however many there are .    they haven t seen the photographs .  they haven t seen the charts .  they haven t seen the tablets .  they haven t seen anything .  and already they have an opinion .   siferra s eyes blazed with rage .   what do they know .  have they ever so much as set foot on the sagikan peninsula .  have they been to beklimot even as tourists .  and they dare to have an opinion on a dig that hasn t been published  that hasn t even been informally discussed within the department  .    siferra    i d like to flay them both .  and veloran and sten also .  they knew they weren t supposed to shoot their mouths off .  where do those two come off breaking priority  even verbally .  i ll show them .  i ll get them both in here and find out which one of them s responsible for leaking the story to hilliko and brangin  and if that one thinks he s ever going to get a doctorate in this university  or she  whichever one it was    please  siferra   balik said soothingly .   you re getting all worked up over nothing .    nothing .  my priority blown  and    nobody s blown anything for you .  it all remains just a rumor until you make your own preliminary statement .  as for veloran and sten  we don t really know that either of them is the one that let the story get out  and if one of them did  well  remember that you were young once too .    yes   siferra said .   three geological epochs ago .    don t be silly .  you re younger than i am  and i m hardly ancient  you know .   siferra nodded indifferently .  she looked toward the window .  suddenly the rain didn t seem so pleasing .  everything was dark outside  disturbingly dark .   still  to hear that our findings are already controversial  and not even published yet    they have to be controversial  siferra .  everybody s wagons are going to be upset by what we found in that hill not just in our department  but history  philosophy  even theology  they ll all be affected .  and you can bet they ll fight to defend their established notions of the way civilization developed .  wouldn t you  if somebody came along with a radical new idea that threatened everything you believe .   be realistic  siferra .  we ve known from the start that there d be a storm over this .    i suppose .  i wasn t ready for it to begin so soon .  i ve hardly begun unpacking .    that s the real problem .  you ve plunged back into the thick of things so fast  without taking any time to decompress .    look  i ve got an idea .  we re entitled to a little time off before we get back to full time academic loads .  why don t you and i run away from the rain and take a little holiday together .  up to jonglor  say  to see the exposition .  i was talking to sheerin yesterday he was just there  you know  and he says   she stared at balik in disbelief .   what .    a holiday  i said .  you and me .    you re making a pass at me  balik .    you could call it that  i suppose .  but is that so incredible .  we aren t exactly strangers .  we ve known each other since we were graduate students .  we ve just come back from a year and a half spent in the desert together .    together .  we were at the same dig  yes .  you had your tent  i had mine .  there s never been anything between us .  and now  out of the blue   balik s stolid features showed dismay and annoyance .   it s not as though i asked you to marry me  siferra .  i just suggested a quick little trip to the jonglor exposition  five or six days  some sunshine  a decent resort hotel instead of a tent pegged out in the middle of the desert  a few quiet dinners  some good wine   he turned his palms outward in a gesture of irritation .   you re making me feel like a silly schoolboy  siferra .    you re acting like one   she said .   our relationship has always been purely professional  balik .  let s keep it that way  shall we .   he began to reply  evidently thought better of it  clamped his lips tight shut .  they looked at each other uncomfortably for a long moment .  siferra s head was pounding .  all this was unexpected and disagreeable the news that the other members of the department were already taking positions on the thombo finds  and balik s clumsy attempt at seducing her as well .  seducing .  well  at establishing some sort of romantic rapport with her  anyway .  how utterly astonished he looked at being rejected  too .  she wondered if she had ever accidentally seemed to be leading him on in some way  to give him a hint of feelings that had never existed .  no .  no .  she couldn t believe that she had .  she had no interest in going to north country resorts and sipping wine in romantically lit restaurants with balik or anyone else .  she had her work .  that was enough .  for twenty odd years  ever since her teens  men had been offering themselves to her  telling her how beautiful  how wonderful  how fascinating she was .  it was flattering  she supposed .  better that they think her beautiful and fascinating than ugly and boring .  but she wasn t interested .  never had been .  didn t want to be .  how tiresome of balik to have created this awkwardness between them now  when they still had all the labor of organizing the beklimot material ahead of them the two of them  working side by side  there was another knock at the door .  she was immensely grateful for the interruption .   who s there .    mudrin       a quavering voice replied .   come in .  please .    i ll leave now   balik said .   no .  he s here to see the tablets .  they re your tablets as much as mine  aren t they .    siferra  i m sorry if    forget it .  forget it .   mudrin came doddering in .  he was a frail  desiccated looking man in his late seventies  well past retirement age  but still retained as a member of the faculty in a nonteaching post so that he could continue his paleographic studies .  his mild graygreen eyes  watery from a lifetime of poring over old faded manuscripts  peered out from behind thick spectacles .  yet siferra knew that their watery appearance was deceptive  those were the sharpest eyes she had ever known  at least where ancient inscriptions were concerned .   so these are the famous tablets   mudrin said .   you know i ve thought about nothing else since you told me .   but he made no immediate move to examine them .    can you give me a little information about the context  the matrix .    here s balik s master photo   siferra said  handing him the huge glossy enlargement .   the hill of thombo  the old midden heap south of beklimot major .  when the sandstorm slit it open  this was the view we had .  and then we ran our trench down here and down to here  next we laid the whole thing open .  can you make out this dark line here .    charcoal .   mudrin asked .   exactly .  a fire line here  the whole town burned .  now we skip down to here and we see a second batch of foundations  and a second fire line .  and if you look here and here   mudrin studied the photograph a long while .   what do you have here .  eight successive settlement sites .    seven   balik blurted .   nine  i think   said siferra curtly .   but i agree it gets pretty difficult to tell  down toward the base of the hill .  we ll need chemical analysis to clear it up  and radiographic testing .  but obviously there was a whole series of conflagrations here .  and the thombo people went on building and rebuilding  time after time .    but this site must be incredibly ancient  if that s the case .   mudrin said .   my guess is that the occupation period was a span of at least five thousand years .  perhaps much more .  perhaps ten or fifteen .  we won t know until we ve fully uncovered the lowest level  and that ll have to wait for the next expedition .  or the one after that .    five thousand years  you say .  can it be .    to build and rebuild and rebuild again .  five  thousand at a minimum .    but no site we ve ever excavated anywhere in the world is remotely as old as that   mudrin said  looking startled .   beklimot itself is less than two thousand years old  isn t that so .  and we regard it as the oldest known human settlement on kalgash .    the oldest known settlement   siferra said .   but what s to say that there aren t older ones .  much older ones .  mudrin  this photo gives you your own answer .  here s a site that has to be older than beklimot there are beklimot style artifacts in its highest level  and it goes down a long way from there .  beklimot must be a very recent settlement as human history goes .  the thombo settlement  which was ancient before beklimot ever existed  must have burned and burned and burned again  and was rebuilt every time  down through what must have been hundreds of generations .    a very unlucky place  then   mudrin observed .   hardly beloved of the gods  was it .    eventually that must have occurred to them   balik said .  siferra nodded .   yes .  finally they must have decided there was a curse on the place .  so instead of rebuilding it after the last fire in the series they moved a short distance away and built beklimot .  but before that they must have occupied thombo a long  long time .  we were able to recognize the architectural styles of the two topmost settlements see  it s cyclopean middle beklimot here  and proto beklimot crosshatch beneath .  but the third town down  what there is left of it  is like nothing i can identify .  the fourth is even stranger  and very crude .  the fifth makes the fourth look sophisticated by comparison .  below that  everything s such a primitive jumble that it s not easy to tell which town is which .  but each one is separated by a burn line from the one above it  or so we think .  and the tablets    yes  the tablets   mudrin said  trembling with excitement .   we found this set  the square ones  in the third level .  the oblong ones came from the fifth one .  i can t even begin to make any sense out of them  of course  but i m no paleographer .    how wonderful it would be   balik began   if these tablets contained some kind of account of the destruction and rebuilding of the thombo towns  and   siferra shot him a poisonous glance .   how wonderful it would be  balik  if you wouldn t spin cozy little wish fulfillment fantasies like that .    i m sorry  siferra   he said icily .   forgive me for breathing .   mudrin took no need of their bickering .  he was at siferra s desk  head bent low over the square tablets for a long while  then over the oblong ones .  finally the paleographer said   astonishing .  absolutely astonishing .    can you read them .   siferra asked .  the old man chuckled .   read them .  of course not .  do you want miracles .  but i see word groups here .    yes .  so did i   siferra said .   and i can almost recognize letters .  not on the older tablets they re done in a completely unfamiliar script  very likely a syllabic one  too many different characters for it to be alphabetic .  but the square tablets seem to be written in a very primitive form of the beklimot script .  see  this is a quhas here  i d almost be willing to wager on it  and this appears to be a somewhat distorted form of the letter tifj ak it is a tifjak  wouldn t you say .   i need to work on these  siferra .  with my own lighting equipment  my cameras  my scanning screens .  may i take them with me .    take them .   she said  as if he had asked to borrow some of her fingers .   it s the only way i can begin to decipher them .    do you think you can decipher them .   balik asked .   i offer no guarantees .  but if this character is a tifjak and this a quhas  then i should be able to find other letters ancestral to the beklimot ones  and at least produce a transliteration .  whether we can understand the language once we read the script  that s hard to say .  and i doubt i can get very far with the oblong tablets unless you ve uncovered a bilingual that will give me some way of approaching this even older script .  but let me try  siferra .  let me try .    yes .  here .   lovingly she gathered up the tablets and put them back in the container in which she had carried them all  the way from sagikan .  it pained her to let them go out of her possession .  but mudrin was right .  he couldn t do anything with them at a quick glance  he had to subject them to laboratory analysis .  she watched ruefully until the paleographer had gone doddering from the room  his precious bundle clasped close against his hollow chest .  now she and balik were alone again .   siferra about what i said before    i told you to forget it .  i already have .  do you mind if i get about my work now  balik .   well  how did he take it .   theremon asked .   better than you expected he would  is my guess .    he was completely marvelous   said beenay .  they were on the terrace at the six suns club .  the rains had ended for the time being  and the evening was a splendid one  with the strange clarity of the atmosphere that always came after a prolonged period of rain  tano and sitha in the west  casting their hard white ghostly light with more than usual intensity  and red dovim in the opposing sector of the dusky sky  burning like a tiny gem .   he hardly even seemed upset  except when i indicated that i d almost been tempted to suppress the whole thing for the sake of protecting his feelings .  then he flew off the handle .  he really chewed me out as i deserved .  but the funniest thing was  waiter .  waiter .  a tano special for me  please .  and one for my friend .  make them doubles .    you re really turning into a drinker  aren t you .   theremon remarked .  beenay shrugged .   only when i m here .  there s something about this terrace  the view of the city  the whole atmosphere    that s how it begins .  you get to like it little by little  you develop jolly associations between one particular place and drinking  then after a while you experiment with having a drink or two somewhere else  and then a drink or three    theremon .  you sound like an apostle of flame .  they think drinking s evil too  don t they .    they think everything s evil but drinking certainly is .  that s what s so wonderful about it  eh  my friend .   theremon laughed .   you were telling me about athor .    yes .  the really comical thing .  do you remember that wild notion you had that some unknown factor might be pushing kalgash away from the orbit we d expect it to have .    the invisible giant  yes .  the dragon huffing and puffing in the sky .    well  athor took exactly the same position .    he thinks there s a dragon in the sky .   beenay guffawed .   don t be silly .  but some sort of unknown factor  yes .  a dark sun  maybe  or some other world that s located at a position that s impossible for us to see  but which nevertheless is exerting gravitational force on kalgash    isn t that all a little on the fantastic side .   theremon asked .   of course it is .  but athor reminded me of the old philosophical chestnut of thargola s sword .  which we use metaphorically  i mean to smite the more complex premise when we re trying to decide between two hypotheses .  it s simpler to go looking for a dark sun than it is to have to produce an entirely new theory of universal gravitation .  and therefore    a dark sun .  but isn t that a contradiction in terms .  a sun is a source of light .  if it s dark  how can it be a sun .    that s just one of the possibilities athor tossed at us .  it isn t necessarily one that he takes seriously .  what we ve been doing  these last few days  is throwing around all kinds of astronomical notions  hoping that one of them will make enough sense so that we can begin to put together an explanation for  look  there s sheerin .   beenay waved at the rotund psychologist  who had just entered the club .   sheerin .  sheerin .  come out here and have a drink with us  will you .   sheerin stepped carefully through the narrow doorway .   so you ve taken up some new vices  have you  beenay .    not very many .  but theremon s exposed me to the tano special  and i m afraid i ve caught a taste for it .  you know theremon  don t you  he writes the column in the chronicle    i don t think we ve actually met   sheerin said .  he offered his hand .   i ve certainly heard a lot about you  though .  i m raissta     s uncle .      the psych professor   theremon said .   you ve been at thc jonglor exposition  right .   sheerin looked startled .   you keep up with everything  don i you .    i try to .   the waiter was back .   what can we get you .  tanc special .    too strong for me   sheerin said .   and a little too sweet  do you have neltigir  by any chance .    the jonglorian brandy .  i m not sure .  how do you want it  if i can find some .    straight   said sheerin .   please .   to theremon and beenay he said   i developed a liking for it while i was up north thc food s awful in jonglor  but at least they can distill a deceni brandy .    i hear they ve had a lot of trouble at the exposition   there .  mon said  some problem in their amusement park a ridc through darkness that was driving people crazy  literally driv .  ing them out of their heads    the tunnel of mystery  yes .  that was the reason i wa  there  as a consultant called in by the city and its lawyers for an opinion .   theremon sat forward .   is it true that people were dying ol shock in that tunnel  and they kept it open anyway .    everyone s been asking me that   replied sheerin .   therc were a few deaths  yes .  but they didn t seem to harm the ride   popularity .  people insisted on taking the risk anyway .  and   lot of them came out very badly deranged .  i took a ride in thc tunnel of mystery myself   he said  shuddering .   well  they vc shut the thing down  now .  i told them it was either that or fori  over millions of credits in liability suits  that it was absurd tc expect people to be able to tolerate darkness at that level ol intensity .  they saw the logic of that .    we do have some neltigir  sir   the waiter broke in  putting a glass of somber brownish brandy on the table in front ol sheerin .   just one bottle  so you d better go easy .   the psychologist nodded and scooped up his drink  downing about half of it before the waiter had left the table .   sir  i said   sheerin smiled at him .   i heard what you said .  i ll take it easier after this one .   he turned to beenay .   i understand there was some excitement at the observatory while i was up north .  liliath told me .  but she wasn t too clear on what was going on .  some new theory  i think she said   grinning  beenay said   theremon and i were just talking about that .  not a new theory  no .  a challenge to an established one .  i was running some calculations on kalgash s orbit  and   sheerin listened to the story with increasing astonishment .   the theory of universal gravitation s invalid .   he cried when beenay was halfway through .   good lord  man .  does that mean that if i put my glass down  it s likely to go floating up into the sky .  i d better finish off my neltigir first  then .   and he did .  beenay laughed .   the theory s still on the books .  what we re trying to do what atbor is trying to do  he s been spearheading the work  and it s amazing to watch him go at it is to come up with a mathematical explanation for why our figures don t come out the way we think they ought to .    massaging the data  i think it s called   theremon added .   sounds suspicious to me   sheerin said .   you don t like the result  so you rearrange your findings  is that it  beenay .  make everything fit  by hook or by crook .    well  not exactly    admit it .  admit it .   sheerin roared with laughter .   waiter .  another neltigir .  and one more tano special for my unethical young friend here .   theremon  can i get you a drink too .    please .   sheerin said in the same broad tone as before   this is all very disillusioning  beenay .  i thought it was only us psychologists who made the data fit the theories and called the result  science .   seems more like something the apostles of flame might do .    sheerin .  cut it out .    the apostles claim to be scientists too   theremon put in .  beenay and sheerin turned to look at him .   last week just before the rain started i had an interview with one of their big people   he went on .   i had hoped to see mondior  but i got a certain folimun    instead  their public relations man  very slick  very bright  very personable .  he spent half an hour explaining to me that the apostles have reliable stientific proof that next year on the nineteenth of theptar the suns are going to go out and we ll all be plunged into darkness and everyone will go insane .    the whole world turned into one big tunnel of mystery  is that it .   sheerin said jovially .   we won t have enough mental hospitals to hold the entire population  you know .  or enough psychiatrists to treat them .  besides  the psychiatrists will be crazy too .    aren t they already .   beenay asked .   good point   said sheerin .   the madness isn t the worst of it   theremon said .   according to folimun  the sky will be filled with something called stars that will shoot fire down upon us and set everything ablaze .  and there we ll be  a world full of gibbering maniacs  wandering around in cities that are burning down around our ears .  thank heaven it s nothing but mondior s bad dream .    but what if it isn t .   sheerin said  suddenly sobering .  his round face grew long and thoughtful .   what if there s something to it .    what an appalling notion   beenay said .   i think it calls for another drink .    you haven t finished the one you ve got   sheerin reminded the young astronomer .   well  what of it .  it still calls for another one afterward .  waiter .  waiter .    athor    felt fatigue sweeping through him in shimmering waves .  the observatory director had lost all track of time .  had he really been at his desk sixteen straight hours .  and yesterday the same .  and the day before  that was what nyilda claimed  anyway .  he had spoken to her just a little while before .  his wife s face on the screen had been tense  drawn  unmistakably worried .   won t you come home for a rest  athor .  you ve been going at it practically around the clock .    have i .    you aren t a young man  you know .    i m not a senile one  either  nyilda .  and this is exhilarating work .  after a decade of initialing budget reports and reading other people s research papers i m finally doing some real work again .  i love it .   she looked even more troubled .   but you don t need to be doing research at your age .  your reputation is secure  athor .    ah  is it .    your name will be famous in the history of astronomy forever .    or infamous   he said balefully .   athor  i don t understand what you    let me be  nyilda .  i m not going to keel over at my desk  believe me .  i feel rejuvenated by what i m doing here .  and it s work that only i can do .  if that sounds pigheaded  so be it  but it s absolutely essential that i   she sighed .   yes  of course .  but don t overdo it  athor .  that s all i ask .   was he overdoing it .  he wondered now .  yes  yes  of course he was .  there wasn t any other way .  you couldn t dabble in these matters .  you had to throw yourself wholeheartedly into them .  when he was working out universal gravitation he had worked sixteen   eighteen   twenty hour days for weeks on end  sleeping only when sleep became unavoidable  snatching brief naps and awakening ready and eager for work  with his mind still bubbling with the equations he had left unfinished a little while before .  but he had been only thirty five or so  then .  he was nearly seventy now .  there was no denying the inroads of age .  his head ached  his throat was dry  there was a nasty pounding in his chest .  despite the warmth of his office his fingertips were chilly with weariness .  his knees were throbbing .  every part of his body protested the strain he had been putting on it .  just a little while longer today  he promised himself  and then i ll go home .  just a little while longer .  postulate eight   sir .    what is it .   he asked .  but his voice must have turned the question into some sort of fierce snarl  for when he glanced around he saw young yimot standing in the doorway doing a bizarre series of wild twitches and convulsions  as though he were dancing on hot embers .  there was terror in the boy s eyes .  of course yimot always seemed intimidated by the observatory director everybody around here was  not just graduate students  and athor was used to it .  athor was awesome and he knew it .  but this went beyond the ordinary .  yimot was gazing at him in undisguised fear mingled with what seemed like astonishment .  yimot struggled visibly to find his voice and said huskily   the calculations you wanted  sir    oh .  yes .  yes .  here  give me .   athor s hand was trembling violently as he reached for the printouts yimot had brought him .  both of them stared at it  aghast .  the long bony fingers were pale as death and they were quivering with a vehemence that not even yimot  famed for his remarkable nervous reactions  could have equaled .  athor willed his hand to be still  but it would not .  he might just as well have been willing onos to spin backward across the sky .  with an effort he snatched the papers from yimot and slapped them down on the desk .  yimot said   if there s anything i can get you  sir    medication  you mean .  how dare you suggest    i just meant something to eat  or maybe a cold drink   yimot said in a barely audible whisper .  he backed slowly away as if expecting athor to growl and leap for his throat .   ah .  ah .  i see .  no  i m fine  yimot .  fine .    yes  sir .   the student went out .  athor closed his eyes a moment  took three or four deep breaths  struggled to calm himself .  he was near the end of his task  of that he was sure .  these figures that he had asked yimot to work out for him were almost certainly the last confirmation he needed .  but the question now was whether the work was going to finish him before he finished the work .  he looked at yimot s numbers .  three screens sat before him on his desk .  on the left hand one was the orbit of kalgash as calculated according to conventional reckoning under the theory of universal gravitation  outlined in blazing red .  on the right hand screen  in fiery yellow  was the revised orbit that beenay had produced  using the new university computer and the most recent observations of kalgash s actual position .  the middle screen carried both orbits plotted one over the other .  in the past five days athor had produced seven different postulates to account for the deviation between the theoretical orbit and the observed one  and he could call up any of those seven postulates on the middle screen with a single key stroke .  the trouble was that all seven of them were nonsense  and he knew it .  each one had a fatal flaw at its heart an assumption that was there not because the calculations justified it  but only because the situation called for some such sort of special assumption in order to make the numbers turn out the right way .  nothing was provable  nothing was confirmable .  it was as though in each case he had simply decreed  at some point in the chain of logic  that a fairy godmother would step in and adjust the gravitational interactions to account for the deviation .  in truth that was precisely what athor knew he needed to find .  but it had to be a real fairy godmother .  postulate eight  now  he began keying in yimot s calculations .  several times his trembling fingers betrayed him and he made an error  but his mind was still sharp enough to tell him instantly that he had hit the wrong key  and he backed up and repaired the damage each time .  twice  as he worked  he nearly blacked out from the intensity of his effort .  but he forced himself to go on .  you are the only person in the world who can possibly do this  he told himself as he worked .  and so you must .  it sounded foolish to him  and madly egocentric  and perhaps a little insane .  it probably wasn t even true .  but at this stage in his exhaustion he couldn t allow himself to consider any other premise but that of his own indispensability .  all the basic concepts of this project were held in his mind  and his mind alone .  he had to push himself onward until he had closed the last link in the chain .  until  there .  the last of yimot s numbers went into the computer .  athor hit the key that brought the two orbits up into view simultaneously on the middle screen  and hit the key that integrated the new number with the existing patterns .  the brilliant red ellipse that was the original theoretical orbit wavered and shifted  and suddenly it was gone .  so was the yellow one of the observed orbit .  now there was only a single line on the screen  a deep  intense orange  the two orbital simulations overlapping to the last decimal place .  athor gasped .  for a long moment he studied the screen  and then he closed his eyes again and bowed his head against the edge of the desk .  the orange ellipse blazed like a ring of flame against his closed eyelids .  he felt a curious sense of exultation mixed with dismay .  he had his answer  now  he had a hypothesis that he was certain would stand up to the closest scrutiny .  the theory of universal gravitation was valid after all  the epochal chain of reasoning on which his fame was based would not be overthrown .  but at the same time he knew now that the model of the solar system with which he was so familiar was in fact erroneous .  the unknown factor for which they had sought  the invisible giant  the dragon in the sky  was real .  athor found that profoundly upsetting  even if it bad rescued his famous theory .  he had thought for years that he fully understood the rhythm of the heavens  and now it was clear to him that his knowledge had been incomplete  that a great strangeness existed in the midst of the known universe  that things were not as he had always believed them to be .  it was hard  at his age  to swallow that .  after a time athor looked up .  nothing had changed on the screen .  he punched in a few interrogative equations  and still nothing changed .  he saw one orbit  not two .  very well  he told himself .  so the universe is not quite as you thought it was .  you  d better rearrange your beliefs  then .  because you certainly can t rearrange the universe .   yimot .   he called .   faro .  beenay .  all of you .   roly poly little faro was the first through the door  with beanpole yimot just behind him  and then the rest of the astronomy department  beenay  thilanda  klet  simbron  and some others .  they clustered just inside the entrance to his office .  athor saw by the expression of shock on their faces that he must be a frightful sight indeed  no doubt wild and haggard  his white hair standing out in all directions  his face pale  his whole appearance that of an old man right on the edge of collapse .  it was important to defuse their fears right away .  this was no moment for melodrama .  quietly he said   yes  i m very tired and i know it .  and i probably look like some demon out of the nether realms .  but i ve got something here that looks like it works .    the gravitational lens idea .   beenay said .   the gravitational lens is a completely hopeless concept   athor said frostily .   the same with the burned out sun  the fold in space  the zone of negative mass  and the other fantastical notions we ve been playing with all week .  they re all very pretty ideas but they don t stand up to hard scrutiny .  there is one that does  though .   he watched their eyes widen .  turning to the screen  he began once again to set up the numbers of postulate eight .  his weariness dropped away as he worked  he struck no wrong keys this time  he felt no aches and pains .  he had moved into a realm beyond fatigue .   in this postulate we assume   he said   a non luminous planetary body similar to kalgash  which is in orbit not around onos but around kalgash itself .  its mass is considerable  in fact is nearly the same as that of kalgash itself  sufficient to exert a gravitational force on our world that causes the perturbations of our orbit which beenay has called to our attention .   athor keyed in the visuals and the solar system appeared on the screen in stylized form  the six suns  kalgash  and the postulated satellite of kalgash .  he turned back to face the others .  they were all looking at each other uneasily .  though they were half his age  or even less  they must be having as much trouble coming to an intellectual and emotional acceptance of the whole idea of another major heavenly body in the universe as he had had .  or else they simply must think he had become senile  and somehow had slipped up in his calculations .   the numbers supporting postulate eight are correct   athor said .   i pledge you that .  and the postulate has withstood every test i could apply .   he glared at them defiantly  looking ferociously at each of them in turn  as if to remind them that he wa  the athor    who had given the world the theory of universal gravitation  and that he had not yet taken leave of his faculties .  beenay said softly   and the reason why we are unable to see this satellite  sir  .    two reasons   replied athor serenely .   like kalgash itself  this planetary body would shine only by reflected light .  if we assume that its surface is made up largely of bluish rock not an implausible geological likelihood then the light reflected from it would be positioned along the spectrum in such a way that the eternal blaze of the six suns  combined with the lightscattering properties of our own atmosphere  would completely mask its presence .  in a sky where several suns are shining at virtually every moment  such a satellite would be invisible to us .   faro said   provided the orbit of the satellite is an extremely large one  isn t that so  sir .    right .   athor keyed in the second visual .   here s a closer look .  as you see  our unknown and invisible satellite travels around us on an enormous ellipse that carries it extremely far from us for many years at a time .  not so distant that we don t display the orbital effects of its presence in the heavens but far enough so that ordinarily there is no possibility of our getting a naked eye view of this dim rocky mass in the sky  and very little possibility of our discovering it even with our telescopes .  since we have no way of knowing it s there by ordinary observation  it would be only by the wildest chance that we d have detected it astronomically .    but of course we can go looking for it now   said thilanda      whose specialty was astrophotography .   and of course we will   athor told her .  they were coming around to the idea now  he saw .  every one of them .  he knew them well enough to see that there were no secret scoffers .   though you may find the search harder than you suspect  very definitely a needle in a haystack proposition .  but there ll be an immediate appropriation for the work  that i pledge you .   beenay said   one question  sir .    go on .    if the orbit s as eccentric as your postulate supposes  and therefore this satellite of ours  this kalgash two  let s call it for the moment kalgash two is extremely distant from us during certain parts of its orbital cycle  then it stands to reason that at other parts of its cycle it s bound to move into a position that s very much closer to us .  there has to be some range of variation even in the most perfect orbit  and a satellite traveling in a large elliptical orbit is likely to have an extreme range between the farthest and the closest points of approach to the primary .    that would be logical  yes   athor said .   but then  sir   beenay went on   if we assume that kalgash two has been so far from us during the entire period of modern astronomical science that we ve been unable to discover its very existence except by the indirect means of measuring its effect on our own world s orbit  wouldn t you agree that it s probably coming back from its farthest distance right now .  that it must currently be approaching us .    that doesn t necessarily follow   yimot said  with a great flurry of his arms .   we don t have any idea where it is along its orbital path right now  or how long it takes to make one complete circuit around kalgash .  it might be a ten thousand year orbit and kalgash two could still be heading away from us after an approach in prehistoric times that no one remembers .    true   beenay admitted .   we can t really say whether it s coming or going at the present moment .  not yet  anyway .    but we can try to find out   faro said .   thilanda has the right idea .  even though all the numbers check out  we need to see whether kalgash two is actually out there .  once we find it we can begin to calculate its orbit .    we should be able to calculate its orbit simply from the perturbations it causes in ours   said klet  who was the department s best mathematician .   yes   simbron put in she was a cosmographer  and we can also figure out whether it s approaching or heading away from us .  gods .  what if it s heading this way .  what an amazing event that would be .  a dark planetary body cutting across the sky passing between us and the suns .  possibly even blotting out the light of some of them for a couple of hours .    how strange that would be   beenay mused .   an eclipse  i suppose you could call it .  you know  the visuayeffect that occurs when some object gets between a viewer and the thing he s looking at .  but could it happen .  the suns are so huge  how could kalgash two actually conceal one of them from view .    if it came close enough to us it might   faro said .   why  i could imagine a situation in which    yes  work out all possible scenarios  why don t you .   athor interjected suddenly  cutting faro off with such brutal abruptness that everyone in the room turned to stare at him .   play with the idea  all of you .  push it this way and that  and see what you get .   suddenly he couldn t bear to sit here any longer .  he had to get away .  the exhilaration he had felt since putting the last piece into place had abruptly deserted him .  he felt a terrible leaden weariness  as though he were a thousand years old .  chills were running along his arms down into his fingers  and something was squirming frantically in the muscles of his back .  he knew that he had pushed himself beyond all endurance now .  it was time for younger workers to relieve him of this enterprise .  rising from his chair before the screens  athor took one uncertain reeling step toward the middle of the room  recovered himself before he could stumble  and walked slowly and with all the dignity he could muster past the observatory staff .   i m going home   he said .   i could use some sleep .    beenay said   am i to understand that the village was destroyed by fire nine times in a row  siferra .  and they rebuilt it every time .    my colleague balik thinks there may be only seven villages piled up in the hill of thombo   the archaeologist replied .   and he may be right  actually .  things are pretty jumbled down toward the lowest levels .  but seven villages  nine villages no matter how many it is exactly  it doesn t change the fundamental concept .  here  look at these charts .  i ve worked them up from my excavation notes .  of course what we did was just a preliminary dig  a quick slice through the whole hill  with the really meticulous work left for a later expedition .  we discovered the hill too late in our work to do anything else .  but these charts ll give you an idea .   you aren t going to be bored  are you .  all this stuff does interest you  doesn t it  beenay .    i find it completely fascinating .  do you think i m so totally preoccupied with astronomy that i can t pay attention to any of the other disciplines .   besides  archaeology and astronomy sometimes go hand in hand .  we ve learned more than a little about the movements of the suns through the heavens by studying the ancient astronomical monuments that you people have been digging up here and there around the world .  here  let me see .   they were in siferra s office .  she had asked beenay to come there to discuss a problem which she said had unexpectedly arisen in the course of her research .  which puzzled him  because he didn t immediately see how an astronomer could help an archaeologist in her work  despite what he had just said about archaeology and astronomy sometimes going hand in hand .  but he was always glad to have a chance to visit with siferra .  they had met initially five years before  when they were working together on an interdisciplinary faculty committee that was planning the expansion of the university library .  though siferra had been out of the country most of the time since then doing field work  she and beenay did enjoy meeting for lunch now and then when she was there .  he found her challenging  highly intelligent  and abrasive in a refreshing sort of way .  what she saw in him he had no idea  perhaps just an intellectually stimulating young man who wasn t involved in the poisonous rivalries and feuds of her own field and had no apparent designs on her body .  siferra unfolded the charts  huge sheets of thin parchmentlike paper on which complex  elegant diagrams had been ruled with pencil  and she and beenay bent forward to examine them at close range .  he had been telling the truth when he said he was fascinated by archaeology .  ever since he d been a boy  he had enjoyed reading the narratives of the great explorers of afitiquity  such men as marpin  shelbik  and of course galdo     .  he found the remote past nearly as exciting to think about as the remote reaches of interstellar space .  his contract mate raissta wasn t greatly pleased by his friendship with siferra .  she had rather testily implied  a couple of times  that it was siferra herself who fascinated him  not her field of research .  but beenay thought raissta s jealousy was absurd .  certainly siferra was an attractive woman it would be disingenuous to pretend otherwise but she was relentlessly non romantic and every man on campus knew it .  besides  she was something like ten years older than beenay .  handsome as she was  beenay had never thought of her with any sort of intimate intentions .   what we have here  first  is a cross section of the entire hill   siferra told him .   i ve plotted each separate level of occupation in a schematic way .  the newest settlement s at the top  naturally huge stone walls  what we call the cyclopean style of architecture  typical of the beklimot culture in its mature period of development .  this line here in the level of the cyclopean walls represents a layer of charcoal remains enough charcoal to indicate a widespread conflagration that must have utterly wiped the city out .  and here  below the cyclopean level and the burn line  is the next oldest settlement .    which is constructed in a different style .    exactly .  you see how i ve drawn the stones of the walls .  it s what we call the crosshatch style  characteristic of the early beklimot culture  or perhaps the culture that developed into beklimot .  both these styles can be seen in the beklimot era ruins that surround the hill of thombo .  the main ruins are cyclopean  and here and there we ve found a little crosshatch stuff  just a mere outcropping or two  which we call protobeklimot .  now  look here  at the border between the crosshatch settlement and the cyclopean ruins above it .    another fire line .   beenay said .   another fire line  yes .  what we have in this hill is like a sandwich a layer of human occupation  a layer of charcoal  another layer of human occupation  another layer of charcoal .  so what i think happened is something like this .  during the time of the crosshatch people there was a devastating fire that scorched a pretty good chunk of the sagikan peninsula and forced the abandonment of the thombo village and other crosshatch style villages nearby .  afterward  when the inhabitants came back and began to rebuild  they used a brand new and more elaborate architectural style  which we call cyclopean because of the huge building stones .  but then came another fire and wiped out the cyclopean settlement .  at that point the people of the area gave up trying to build cities on the hill of thombo and this time when they rebuilt they chose another site nearby  which we term beklimot major .  we ve believed for a long time that beklimot major was the first true human city  emerging from the smaller crosshatch type proto beklimotperiod settlements scattered all around it .  what thombo tells us is that there was at least one important cyclopean city in the area before beklimot major existed .    and the beklimot major site   beenay said   shows no trace of fire damage .    no .  so it wasn t there when the city on top of thombo was burned .  eventually the whole beklimot culture collapsed and beklimot major itself was abandoned  but that was for other reasons having to do with climatic shifts .  fire had nothing to do with it .  that was perhaps a thousand years ago .  but the fire that wrecked the topmost thombo village seems to have been much earlier than that .  i d guess about a thousand years earlier .  the radiocarbon dates from the charcoal samples will give us a more precise figure when we get them from the lab .    and the crosshatch settlement how old is that .    orthodox archaeological belief has been that the fragmentary crosshatch structures we ve found here and there on the sagikan peninsula are only a few generations older than the beklimot major site .  after the thombo excavation  i don t think so .  my guess is that the crosshatch settlement on that hill is two thousand years older than the cyclopean buildings on top of it .    two thousand  .  and you say there are other settlements below that one .    look at the chart   siferra said .   here s number three a kind of architecture we ve never seen before  nothing at all like crosshatch work .  then another burn line .  settlement number four .  and a burn line .  number five .  a burn line .  then numbers six  seven  eight  and nine or  if balik s reading is correct  just numbers six and seven .    and each one destroyed by a great fire .  that seems pretty remarkable to me .  a deadly cycle of destruction  striking again and again and again in the same place .    the remarkable thing   said siferra in a curiously somber tone   is that each of these settlements appears to have flourished for approximately the same length of time before being destroyed by fire .  the layers of occupation are quite extraordinarily similar in thickness .  we re still waiting for the lab reports  you understand .  but i don t think my eyeball estimate is very far off .  and balik s figures are the same as mine .  unless we re completely mistaken  we re looking at a minimum of fourteen thousand years of prehistory in the hill of thombo .  and during those fourteen thousand years the hill was periodically swept by massive fires that forced its abandonment with clockwork regularity one fire every two thousand years  just about exactly .    what .   a shiver traveled along beenay s spine .  his mind was beginning to leap to all manner of improbable and disturbing conclusions .   wait   siferra said .   there s more .   she opened a drawer and took out a stack of glossy photographs .   these are pictures of the thombo tablets .  mudrin     has the originals the paleographer  you know .  he s been trying to decipher them .  they re made of baked clay .  we found these three in level three  and these in level five .  they re both written in extremely primitive scripts  and the writing on the older ones is so ancient that mudrin can t even make a start on them .  but he s been able very tentatively to puzzle out a couple of dozen words from the level three tablets  which are written in an early form of the beklimot script .  so far as he can tell at this point  they re an account of the destruction of a city by fire the work of angry gods who periodically find it necessary to punish mankind for wickedness .    periodically .    that s right .  does it begin to sound familiar .    the apostles of flame .  my god  siferra  what have you stumbled on here .    that s what i ve been asking myself since mudrin brought me the first sketchy translations .   the archaeologist swung around to face beenay  and for the first time beenay saw how bleary her eyes were  how tense and drawn her face .  she looked almost distraught .   do you see now why i asked you to come here .  i can t talk about this with anyone in the department .  beenay  what am i going to do .  if any of this becomes public  mondior    and his whole crazy crew will proclaim it from the rooftops that i ve discovered firm archaeological proof of their crackpot theories .    you think so .    what else .   siferra tapped the charts .   here s evidence of repeated fiery destruction at two thousand year intervals  roughly  over a period of many thousands of years .  and these tablets the way it looks now  they might actually be some sort of prehistoric version of the book of revelations .  taken together  they provide  if not actual confirmation of the rantings of the apostles  then at least a solid rational underpinning for their whole mythology .    but repeated fires at a single site don t prove that there was worldwide devastation   beenay objected .   it s the periodicity that worries me   said siferra .   it s too neat  and too close to what mondior s been saying .  i ve been looking at the book of revelations .  the sagikan peninsula is a holy place to the apostles  did you know that .  the sacred site where the gods formerly made themselves visible to humanity  so they say .  and therefore it stands to reason listen to me  it stands to reason   she said  laughing bitterly  that the gods would preserve sagikan as a warning to mankind of the doom that will come again and again if we don t alter our wicked ways .   beenay stared at her  stunned .  he knew very little about the apostles and their teachings  really .  such pathological fantasizing had never held any interest for him  and he had been too busy with his scientific work to pay heed to mondior s windy apocalyptic prophecies .  but now the memory of the conversation he had had some weeks before with theremon     at the six suns club burst with furious impact into his consciousness .    .   .    .  won t be the first time the world has been destroyed  .   .   .  the gods have deliberately made mankind imperfect and given us a single year one of their divine years  not one of our little ones in which to shape up .  that s called a year of godliness  and it   c exactly two thousand and forty nine of our years long .   no .  no .  no .  no .  idiocy .  claptrap .  hysterical folly .  there was more .   again and again  when the year of godliness has ended  the gods have discovered that we re still wicked and sinful  and so they have destroyed the world by sending down heavenly flames .   .   .   .  so say the apostles  anyway .   no .  no .   beenay .   siferra said .   are you all right .    just thinking   he told her .   by darkness  it s true .  you d give the apostles complete confirmation .    not necessarily .  it would still be possible for people who are capable of thinking clearly to reject mondior s ideas .  the destruction of thombo by fire even the repeated destruction of thombo at apparently regular intervals of approximately two thousand years doesn t in any way prove that the whole world was destroyed by fire .  or that some such great fire must inevitably come again .  why should the past necessarily be recapitulated in the future .  but people who are capable of thinking clearly are in a minority  of course .  the rest of them will be swayed by mondior s use of my findings and go into an immediate panic .  you know  don t you  that the apostles claim the next great world destroying fire is due to strike us next year .    yes   beenay said hoarsely .   theremon tells me that they ve pinpointed the exact day .  it s a two thousand andforty nine year cycle  actually  and this is the two thousandand forty eighth year  and in something like eleven or twelve more months  if you believe mondior  the sky will turn black and fire will descend on us .  i think the nineteenth of theptar is when it s supposed to happen .    theremon .  the newspaperman .    yes .  he s a friend of mine  actually .  he s interested in the whole apostles thing and he s been interviewing one of their high priests  or whatever .  theremon told me   siferra s hand shot out and caught beenay s arm  her fingers digging in with astonishing force .   you ve got to promise me you won t say a word about any of this to him  beenay .    to theremon .  no  of course not .  you haven t published your findings yet .  it wouldn t be proper for me to say anything to anybody .   but of course he s a very honorable man .   her iron grip relaxed  but only a little .   sometimes things get said between friends  off the record  but you know  beenay  there s no such thing as  off the record  when you re talking to someone like theremon .  if he sees a reason to use it  he ll use it  no matter what he may have promised you .  or however  honorable  you like to think he is .    well perhaps    trust me .  and if theremon were to find out what i ve come up with here  you can bet your ears it ll be all over the chronicle half a day later .  that would ruin me professionally  beenay .  it would be all i need  to become known as the scientist who provided the apostles with proof of their absurd claims .  the apostles are totally repugnant to me  beenay .  i don t want to offer them any sort of aid and comfort  and i certainly don t want to seem to be publicly espousing their crackpot ideas .    don t worry   beenay said .   i won t breathe a word .    you mustn t .  as i say  it would wreck me .  i ve come back to the university to have my research grant renewed .  my thombo findings are already stirring up controversy in the department  because they challenge the established view of beklimot as the oldest urban center .  but if theremon somehow manages to wrap the apostles of flame around my neck on top of everything else   but beenay was barely listening .  he was sympathetic to siferra s problem  and certainly he would do nothing to cause difficulties for her .  theremon would hear not one word about her research from him .  his mind had moved on  though  to other things  vastly troublesome things .  phrases out of theremon s account of the teachings of the apostles continued to churn in his memory .    in something like fourteen months the suns will all disappear     the stars will shoot flame down out of a black sky     the exact time of the catastrophe can be calculated scient flcally    a black sky     the suns will all disappear    darkness .   beenay muttered harshly .   can it be possible .   siferra had gone on talking .  at his outburst she halted in mid sentence .   you aren t paying attention to me  beenay .    i what .  oh .  oh .  yes  of course i m paying attention .  you were saying that i mustn t let theremon know anything about this  because it would harm your reputation  and and listen  siferra  do you think we could continue discussing this some other time .  this evening  or tomorrow afternoon  or whenever .  i ve got to get over to the observatory right away .    don t let me detain you  then   she said coldly .   no .  i don t mean it that way .  what you ve been telling me is of the most colossal interest to me and importance  tremendous importance  more than i can even say at this point .  but i ve got to check something .  something with a direct bearing on everything we ve been discussing .   she gave him a close look .   your face is flushed .  your eyes are wild  beenay .  you seem so strange  all of a sudden .  your mind s a million miles away .  what s going on .    i ll tell you later   he said  halfway out the door .   later .  i promise you .    at this hour the observatory was practically deserted .  no one was there but faro and thilanda .  to beenay s relief  athor    was nowhere to be seen .  good  beenay thought .  the old man was exhausted enough from the effort he had devoted to working out the kalgash two concept .  he didn t need more stress loaded upon him this evening .  and it would be just fine  having only faro and thilanda here .  faro had exactly the kind of quick  untrammeled mind that beenay needed right now .  and thilanda  who had spent so many years scanning the empty spaces of the heavens with her telescope and camera  might be able to fill in some of the conceptual material beenay would require .  thilanda said at once   i ve been developing plates all day  beenay .  but it s no go .  i d stake my life on it  there s nothing up there in the sky except the six suns .  you don t think the great man s finally gone around the bend  do you .    i think his mind is as sharp as ever .    but these photos   thilanda said .   i ve been running a random scan of every quadrant of the universe for days now .  the program s all inclusive .  snap  move down a couple of degrees  snap  move  snap .  methodically sweeping the entire sky .  and look at what i m getting  beenay .  a bunch of pictures of nothing at all .    if the unknown satellite is invisible  thilanda  then it can t be seen .  it s as simple as that .    invisible to the naked eye  maybe .  but the camera ought to be able to    listen  never mind that now .  i need some help from you two  purely theoretical stuff .  related to athor s new theory .    but if the unknown satellite s nothing but pie in the sky   thilanda protested .   invisible pie might still be real pie   beenay snapped .   and we won t like it when it comes hurtling out of nowhere and hits us in the face .  will you help me or won t you .    well    good .  what i want you to do is prepare computer projections of the movements of all six suns covering a period of forty two hundred years .   thilanda gaped incredulously .   four thousand two hundred  is that what you said  beenay .    i know that you don t remotely have records of stellar movements over any such span .  but i said computer projections  thilanda .  you ve got at least a hundred years of reliable records  right .    more than that .    even better .  set them up and project them backward and forward in time .  have the computer tell you what every daily combination of the six suns was for the last twenty one centuries  and for the twenty one centuries to come .  if you can t do it  i m sure faro will be glad to help you write the program .    i think i can manage it   said thilanda in a glacial tone .   and would you mind telling me what this is all about .  are we going into the almanac business now .  even the almanac is content to settle for just the next few years of solar data .  so what are you up to .    i ll tell you later   beenay said .   that s a promise .   he left her fuming at her desk and walked across the observatory to athor s work area  where he took a seat in front of the three computer screens on which athor had calculated the kalgash two theory .  for a long moment beenay stared thoughtfully at the center screen  showing the orbit of kalgash as perturbed by the hypothetical kalgash two .  then he touched a key and the proposed orbital line of kalgash two became visible in bright green  a huge eccentric ellipse splayed out across kalgash s own more compact and nearly circular orbit .  he studied it for a while  then he hit the keys that would bring the suns onto the screen  and peered broodingly at them for perhaps an hour  summoning them in all their varying configurations  now onos in the sky with tano and sitha  onos with trey and patru  onos and dovim with trey and patru  dovim with trey and patru  dovim with tano and sitha  patru and trey alone  the normal patterns  yes .  but what about abnormal patterns .  tano and sitha alone .  no  it couldn t happen .  the relationship of that double sun system s position in the heavens to the location of the closer suns was such that tano and sitha could never appear in the sky in this hemisphere unless either onos or dovim  or both of them  were visible at the same time .  maybe it had been possible hundreds or thousands of years ago  he thought  though he doubted it .  but certainly not now .  trey and patru and tano and sitha .   another no .  the two sets of double suns were on opposite sides of kalgash  whenever one pair was in the sky  the other one generally was hidden by the planet s own bulk .  now and then the four of them did manage to get together in the sky  but onos always was visible when such two pair conjunctions occurred .  those were the famous five sun days which produced the equally distinctive dovim only days in the opposite hemisphere .  they happened only every few years .   trey without patru .  tano without sitha .  well  technically  yes .  when one of the double sun pairs was close to the horizon  one sun would be above the horizon and one of them below it for a brief period .  but that wasn t really a significant solar event  just a momentary aberration .  the double suns were still together  but transiently separated by the line of the horizon .  all six suns in the sky at once .  impossible .  worse than that unthinkable .  yet he had just thought it .  beenay shivered at the idea .  if all six of them were above the horizon simultaneously  then there would have to be a region in the other hemisphere where no sunlight whatever could be seen .  darkness .  darkness .  but darkness was unknown everywhere on kalgash  except as an abstract concept .  there could never have been a time when the six suns moved together and a major part of the world was plunged into utter lightlessness .  could there have been .  could there .  beenay pondered the chilling possibility .  once more he heard theremon s deep voice explaining the theories of the apostles to him    the suns will all disappear     the stars will shoot flame down out of a black sky   he shook his head .  everything he knew about the movements of the suns in the heavens rebelled against the idea of the six of them somehow bunching up on one side of kalgash at the same time .  it just couldn t happen  short of a miracle .  beenay didn t believe in miracles .  the way the suns were arranged in the sky  there always had to be at least one or two of them shining over every part of kalgash at any given moment .  forget the six suns here  darkness there hypothesis .  what was left .  dovim alone  he thought .  the little red sun all alone in the sky .  well  yes  it did happen  though not often .  on those occasional five sun days when tano  sitha  trey  patru  and onos all were in conjunction in the same hemisphere  that left only dovim for the other side of the world .  beenay wondered whether that might be the moment when the darkness came .  could it be .  dovim by itself might cast so little light  just its cool and feeble reddish purple gleam  that people might mistake it for darkness .  but that didn t really make sense .  even little dovim should be able to provide enough light to keep people from plunging into terror .  besides  dovim only days occurred somewhere in the world every few years .  they were uncommon  but not all that extraordinary .  surely  if the effects of seeing nothing but a single small dim sun in the sky could cause vast psychological upheavals  then everybody would be worrying about the next dovim only event  which was due  as beenay recalled  in just another year or so .  and in fact nobody was thinking about it at all .  but if dovim alone were in the sky  and something happened  some special thing  some truly uncommon thing  to blot out what little light it provided  thilanda appeared at his shoulder and said sourly   all right  beenay  i ve got your solar projections all set up .  not just forty two hundred years  either  but an infinite regression .  faro gave me a suggestion for the math and we ve done the program so that it ll run clear to the end of time if you want it to  or backward to the beginning of the universe .    fine .  pipe it over to the computer i m using  will you .  and will you come here  faro .   the pudgy little graduate student ambled over .  his dark eyes were agleam with curiosity .  obviously he was bubbling with questions about what beenay was doing  but he observed student professor protocol and said nothing  merely waited to hear what beenay would tell him .   what i ve got here on my screen   beenay began   is athor s suggested orbit for the hypothetical kalgash two .  i m going to assume that the orbit s a correct one  since athor has told us that it accurately accounts for all the perturbations in our own orbit  and i have faith that athor knows what he s doing .  i also have here  or at any rate i will when thilanda has finished the data transfer  the program that you and she have just worked out for solar movements over a long span of time .  what i m going to do now is to attempt to work out a correlation between the presence of just one sun in the sky and the close approach of kalgash two to this planet  so that    so that you can calculate the frequency of eclipses .   faro blurted .   is that it  sir .   the boy s quickness was amusing and also a little disconcerting .   as a matter of fact  it is .  you have eclipses on your mind too  do you .    i was thinking about them when athor told us all about kalgash two the first time .  simbron  you remember  mentioned that the strange satellite might hide the light of some of the suns for a little while  and you said that that would be called an eclipse  and then i started to work out some of the possibilities .  but athor cut me off before i could say anything  because he was tired and wanted to go home .    and you haven t said anything about it since .    no one s asked me   faro said .   well  here s your moment .  i m going to transfer everything that s on my computer to yours  and you and i are going to sit down in this room separately and begin pushing the numbers around .  what i m searching for is a very special case in which kalgash two is at its closest point of approach to kalgash and   there s only one sun in the sky .   faro nodded .  he headed for his computer at a speed faster than beenay had ever seen him move before .  beenay didn t expect to be the first to finish the computation .  faro was notoriously quick at such things .  but the point was to have each of them work on the problem independently  to provide separate validation of the result .  so when faro made a snorting sound of triumph after a little while and jumped up to say something  beenay irritably waved at him to be silent and went on working .  it took him ten embarrassing eternal minutes more .  then the numbers began coming up on his screen .  if every assumption that he had fed into the computer was correct athor s calculation of the unknown satellite s probable mass and orbit  thilanda s calculation of the movements of the six suns in the heavens then it wasn t very likely that darkness was going to come .  the only possibility that would bring total darkness was a dovim only day .  but it didn t look as if kalgash two stood much chance of eclipsing dovim .  dovim only days were such rarities that the likelihood of dovim s being alone in the sky at the time when kalgash two was anywhere near kalgash in its long orbit was infinitesimal  beenay knew .  or were they .  no .  not infinitesimal .  not at all .  he took a careful look at the figures on the screen .  there seemed to be a slim possibility of a convergence .  the calculation wasn t complete  but things were heading in that direction as the computer worked over each kalgash kalgash two conjunction in the forty two hundred year period of the inquiry .  every time kalgash two came round on its orbit  it reached kalgash s vicinity closer and closer to a dovim only day .  the numbers continued to appear  as the computer processed all the astronomical possibilities .  beenay watched in mounting awe and disbelief .  there it was  finally .  all three bodies lined up in just the right way .  kalgash kalgash two dovim .  yes .  it was possible for kalgash two to cause a total eclipse of dovim when dovim was the only sun visible in the sky .  but that configuration was an extreme rarity .  dovim had to be alone in its hemisphere and at maximum distance from kalgash  while kalgash two had to be at its minimum distance .  kalgash two s apparent diameter would then be seven times that of dovim .  that was sufficient to hide dovim s light for well over half a day  so that no spot on the planet would escape the effects of darkness .  the computer showed that such a highly special circumstance was capable of occurring only once every  beenay gasped .  he didn t want to believe it .  he turned to faro .  the young graduate student s round face was pale with shock .  huskily beenay said   all right .  i m done  and i ve got a number .  but first you tell me yours .    eclipse of dovim by kalgash two  periodicity of two thousand and forty nine years .    yes   beenay said leadenly .   my number exactly .  once every two thousand and forty nine years .   he felt dizzy .  the entire universe seemed to be reeling around him .  once every two thousand and forty nine years .  the exact length of a year of godliness  according to the apostles of flame .  the very same figure that was given in the book of revelations .    the suns will all disappear     the stars will shoot flame down out of a black sky   he didn t know what stars were .  but siferra had discovered a hill on the sagikan peninsula where cities had been destroyed by flame with astonishing regularity  approximately every two thousand years .  when she had had a chance to run exact carbon    tests  would the precise figure of the time between each conflagration on the hill of thombo turn out to be two thousand and forty nine years .    a black sky   beenay stared helplessly across the room at faro .   when s the next dovim only day due to occur .   he asked .   in eleven months and four days   faro said grimly .   on the nineteenth of theptar .    yes   beenay said .   the same day when  mondior    tells us  the sky is going to turn black and the fire of the gods is going to descend and destroy our civilization .   for the first time in my life   athor said   i find myself praying with all my heart that my calculations are wrong .  but i fear the gods have granted me no such mercy .  we find ourselves inexorably swept along toward a conclusion that is terrible to contemplate .   he looked around the room  letting his gaze rest for a moment on each of the people he had called together .  young beenay     of course .  sheerin      from the psychology department .  siferra     the archaeologist .  by sheer force of will alone athor fought to conceal from them the vast fatigue he felt  the sense of growing despair  the crushing impact of all that he had learned in the weeks just past .  he fought to conceal all those things even from himself .  now and then lately he had found himself thinking that he had lived too long  found himself wishing that he had been allowed to go to his rest a year or two ago .  but he swept such thoughts mercilessly from his mind .  an iron will and unflagging strength of spirit had always been athor s prime characteristics .  he refused now  with age making inroads oh his vigor  to let those traits slip away .  to sheerin he said   your field  as i understand it  is the study of darkness .   the plump psychologist seemed amused .   i suppose that s one way of putting it .  my doctoral thesis was on darknessrelated mental disorders .  but darkness research has been only one facet of my work .  i m interested in mass hysteria of all sorts in the irrational responses of the human mind to overwhelming stimuli .  the whole roster of human nuttiness  that s what keeps the bread on my table .    very well   athor said coolly .   be that as it may .  beenay    says you re the ranking authority on darkness at the university .  you ve just seen our little astronomical demonstration on the computer screen .  i assume you comprehend the essential implications of what we ve discovered .   the old astronomer could not find some way of preventing that from sounding patronizing .  but sheerin didn t seem particularly offended .  calmly he said   i think i grasped it well enough .  you re saying that there s a mysterious invisible planetary sized astronomical body of such and such mass in orbit around kalgash at such and such a distance  and what with one such and such and the other  its force of attraction exactly accounts for certain deviations from theory in kalgash s orbit that my friend beenay here has discovered .  am i right so far .    yes   athor said .   q ite correct .    well   sheerin continued   it turns out that sometimes this body would get between us and one of our suns .  this is termed an eclipse .  but only one sun lies in its plane of revolutions in such a way that it can ever be eclipsed  and that sun is dovim .  it has been shown that the eclipse will occur only when   sheerin paused  frowning   when dovim is the only sun in the sky  and both it and this so called kalgash two are lined up in such a way that kalgash two completely covers the disk of dovim and no light at all gets through to us .  am i still doing okay .   athor nodded .   you ve grasped it perfectly .    i was afraid of that .  i was hoping i had misunderstood .    now  as to the effects of the eclipse   athor said .  sheerin took a deep breath .   all right .  the eclipse which happens only once every two thousand and forty nine years  the gods be thanked .  will cause an extended period of universal darkness on kalgash .  as the world turns  each continent will be totally dark for periods ranging from what did you say .  nine to fourteen hours  depending on latitude .    now  if you please   athor said   what is your opinion  as a professional psychologist  of the effect that this will create in the minds of human beings .    the effect   sheerin said unhesitatingly   will be madness .   it was suddenly very quiet in the room .  at length athor said   universal madness  is that what you re predicting .    very likely .  universal darkness  universal madness .  my guess is that people will be affected to varying degrees  ranging from short range disorientation and depression to complete and permanent destruction of the reasoning powers .  the greater the psychological stability one has to begin with  naturally  the less likely one is to be entirely shattered by the impact of the absence of all light .  but no one  i think  will be entirely unscathed .    i don t understand   beenay said .   what is there in darkness to drive people mad .   sheerin smiled .   we simply aren t adapted for it .  imagine  if you can  a world that has only one sun .  as that world rotates on its axis  each hemisphere will receive light for half the day and will be entirely dark for the other half .   beenay made an involuntary gesture of horror .   do you see .   sheerin cried .   you don t even like the sound of it .  but the inhabitants of that planet will be quite accustomed to a daily dose of darkness .  very likely they ll find the daylight hours cheerier and more to their liking  but they ll shrug off the darkness as an ordinary everyday event  nothing to get excited about  just something to sleep through while waiting for morning to come .  not us  though .  we ve evolved under conditions of perpetual sunlight  every hour of the day  all year round .  if onos isn t in the sky  tano and sitha and dovim are  or patru and trey  and so forth .  our minds  even the physiologies of our bodies  are accustomed to constant brightness .  we don t like even a brief moment wfthout it .  you sleep with a godlight on in your room  i take it .    of course   beenay said .   of course .  why  of course  .    why  .  but everybody sleeps with a godlight .    my point exactly .  tell me this  have you ever experienced darkness  friend beenay .   beenay leaned against the wall next to the big picture window and considered .   no .  can t say i have .  but i know what it is .  just uh   he made vague motions with his fingers  and then brightened .   just an absence of light .  like in caves .    have you ever been in a cave .    in a cave .  of course i haven t been in a cave .    i thought not .  i tried  once  long ago when i was beginning my studies of darkness induced disorders .  but i got out in a hurry .  i went in until the mouth of the cave was just visible as a blur of light  with black everywhere else .   sheerin chuckled pleasantly .   i never thought a person of my weight could run that fast .   almost defiantly beenay said   well  if it comes to that  i guess i wouldn t have run  if i had been there .   the psychologist smiled gently at the young astronomer .   bravely said .  i admire your courage  my friend .   turning to athor  sheerin said   may i have your permission  sir  to perform a little psychological experiment .    whatever you wish .    thank you .   sheerin looked toward beenay again .   do you mind drawing the curtain next to you  friend beenay .   beenay looked surprised .   what for .    just draw the curtain .  then come over here and sit down next to me .    well  if you insist   heavy red draperies hung by the windows .  athor couldn t remember a time when they had ever been drawn  and this room had been his office for some forty years .  beenay  with a shrug  reached for the tasseled string and jerked .  the red curtain slid across the wide window  the brass rings hissing their way along the crossbar .  for a moment the dusk red light of dovim could still be seen .  then all was in shadows  and even the shadows became indistinct .  beenay s footsteps sounded hollowly in the silence as he made his way to the table  and then they stopped halfway .   i can t see you  sheerin   he whispered forlornly .   feel your way   sheerin ordered in a strained voice .   but i can t see you .   the young astronomer was breathing harshly .   i can t see anything .    what did you expect .  this is darkness .   sheerin waited a moment .   come on .  you must know your way around this room even with your eyes closed .  just walk over here and sit down .   the footsteps sounded again  waveringly .  there was the sound of someone fumbling with a chair .  beenay s voice came thinly   here i am .      how do you feel .    i m ulp  all right .    you like it  do you .   a long pause .    no  beenay .    not at all .  it s awful .  it s as if the walls are   he paused again .   they seem to be closing in on me .  i keep wanting to push them away .   but i m not going mad at all .  in fact  i think i m getting used to it .    all right .  siferra .  what about you .    i can take a little darkness .  i ve gone crawling around in some underground passages now and then .  but i can t say i care for it much .    athor .    i m also still surviving .  but i think you ve proved your point  dr .  sheerin   said the observatory head  sharply .   all right .  beenay  draw the curtains back again .   there were cautious footsteps through the dark  the rustle of beenay s body against the curtain as he felt for the tassel  and then the relief of hearing the curtain s ro o osb as it slithered open .  the red light of dovim flooded the room  and with a cry of joy beenay looked out the window at the smallest of the six suns .  sheerin wiped the moistness off his forehead with the back of a hand and said shakily   and that was just a few minutes in a dark room .    it can be tolerated   said beenay lightly .   yes  a dark room can .  at least for a short while .  but you all know about the jonglor centennial exposition  don t you .  the tunnel of mystery scandal .  beenay  i told you the story that evening last summer at the six suns club  when you were with that newspaperman theremon .    yes .  i remember .  the people who took that ride through darkness in the amusement park and came out insane .    just a mile long tunnel with no lights .  you got into a little open car and jolted along through darkness for fifteen minutes .  some who took the ride died of fright .  others came out permanently deranged .    and why was that .  what drove them crazy .    essentially the same thing that was operating on you just now when we had the curtain closed and you thought the walls of the room were crushing in on you in the dark .  there s a psychological term for mankind s instinctive fear of the absence of light .  we call it  claustrophobia   because the lack of light is always tied up with enclosed places  so that the fear of one is fear of the other .  you see .    and those people of the tunnel who went crazy .    those people of the tunnel who went ah crazy  to use your word  were those unfortunate ones who didn t have sufficient psychological resilience to overcome the claustrophobia that engulfed them in the darkness .  it was a powerful feeling .  believe me .  i took the tunnel ride myself .  you had only a couple of minutes without light just now  and i believe you were fairly upset .  now imagine fifteen minutes .    but didn t they recover afterward .    some did .  but some will suffer for years  or perhaps for the rest of their lives  from claustrophobic fixations .  their latent fear of darkness and enclosed places has crystallized and become  so far as we can tell  permanent .  and some  as i said  died of shock .  no recovery for them  eh .  that s what fifteen minutes in the dark can do .    to some people   beenay said stubbornly .  his forehead wrinkled slowly into a frown .   i still don t believe it s going to be that bad for most of us .  certainly not for me .   sheerin sighed in exasperation .   imagine darkness everywhere .  no light  as far as you can see .  the houses  the trees  the fields  the earth  the sky black .  and stars thrown in  if you listen to the preaching of the apostles stars  whatever they are .  can you conceive it .    yes  i can   declared beenay  even more truculently .   no .  no  you can t .   sheerin slammed his fist down upon the table in sudden passion .   you re fooling yourself .  you can t conceive that .  your brain wasn t built for the concept any more than  look  beenay  you re a mathematician  aren t you .  can your brain really and truly conceive of the concept of infinity .  of eternity .  you can only talk about it .  reduce it to equations and pretend that the abstract numbers are the reality  when in fact they re just marks on paper .  but when you try really to encompass the idea of infinity in your mind you start getting dizzy pretty fast  i m certain of that .  a fraction of the reality upsets you .  the same with the little bit of darkness you just tasted .  and when the real thing comes  your brain is going to be presented with a phenomenon outside its limits of comprehension .  you ll go insane  beenay .  completely and permanently .  i have no doubt of that whatever .   once again there was a sudden terrible silence in the room .  athor said  at last   that s your final conclusion  dr .  sheerin .  widespread insanity .    at least seventy five percent of the population made irrational to a disabling degree .  perhaps eighty five percent .  perhaps even a hundred percent .   athor shook his head .   monstrous .  hideous .  a calamity beyond belief .  though i must tell you i feel somewhat the way beenay does that we will get through this somehow  that the effects will be less cataclysmic than your opinion would indicate .  old as i am  i can t help feeling a certain optimism  a certain sense of hope   siferra said suddenly   may i speak  dr .  athor .    of course .  of course .  that s why you re here .   the archaeologist rose and came to the center of the room .   in some ways it surprises me that i m here at all .  when i first discussed my sagikan peninsula discoveries with beenay here  i begged him to keep them absolutely confidential .  i was fearful for my scientific reputation  because i saw that the data i had uncovered could very easily be construed as giving support to the most irrational  the most frightening  the most dangerous religious movement that exists within our society .  i m speaking  naturally  of the apostles of flame .   but then  when beenay came back to me a little while later with his new findings  the discovery of the periodicity of these eclipses of dovim  i knew i had to reveal what i know .  i have here photographs and charts of my excavation at the hill of thombo  near the beklimot site on the sagikan peninsula .  beenay  you ve already seen them  but if you ll be good enough to pass them to dr .  athor and dr .  sheerin   siferra waited until they had had a chance to glance at the material .  then she resumed speaking .   the charts will be easier to understand if you think of the hill of thombo as a giant layer cake of ancient settlements  each built upon its immediate predecessor the youngest one at the top of the hill  naturally .  that one is a city of what we call the beklimot culture .  below it is one built by those same people  we think  in an earlier phase of their civilization  and then down and down and down  for a total of at least seven different periods of settlement  perhaps even more .   each of those settlements  gentlemen  came to an end because it was destroyed by fire .  you can see  i think  the dark boundaries between the layers .  those are the burn lines charcoal remnants .  my original guess  based purely on an intuitive sense of how long it might have taken for these cities to have arisen  flourished  decayed  and crumbled  is that each of these great fires happened something like two thousand years apart  with the most recent of them taking place about two thousand years ago  just prior to the unfolding of the beklimot culture that we regard as the beginning of the historical period .   but charcoal is particularly well suited for radiocarbon dating  which gives us a fairly precise indication of the age of a site .  ever since my thombo material reached saro city  our departmental lab has been busy doing radiocarbon analysis  and now we have our figures .  i can tell you what they are from memory .  the youngest of the thombo settlements was destroyed by fire two thousand and fifty years ago  with a statistical deviation of plus or minus twenty years .  the charcoal from the settlement below that is forty one hundred years old  with a deviation of plus or minus forty years .  the third settlement from the top was destroyed by fire sixty two hundred years ago  with a deviation of plus or minus eighty years .  the fourth settlement down shows a radiocarbon age of eighty three hundred years  plus or minus a hundred .  the fifth    great gods .   sheerin cried .   are they all spaced as evenly as that .    every one of them .  the fires occurred at intervals of a little more than twenty centuries .  allowing for the slight inaccuracies that are inevitable in radiocarbon dating  it s still altogether permissible to propose that in fact they took place exactly two thousand and forty nine years apart .  which  as beenay has demonstrated  is precisely the frequency at which eclipses of dovim occur .   and also   siferra added in a bleak voice   the length of what the apostles of flame call a year of godliness  at the end of which the world is supposed to be destroyed by fire .    an effect of the mass insanity  yes   sheerin said hollowly .   when the darkness comes  people will want light of any sort .  torches .  bonfires .  burn anything .  burn the furniture .  burn houses .    no   beenay muttered .   remember   sheerin said   these people won t be sane .  they ll be like small children but they ll have the bodies of adults and the remnants of the minds of adults .  they ll know how to use matches .  they just won t remember the consequences of lighting a lot of fires all over the place .    no   beenay said again  hopelessly .   no .  no .   it wasn t a statement of disbelief any longer .  siferra said   it could be argued originally that the fires at thombo were a purely local event an odd coincidence  such a rigid pattern of regular occurrence over such an immense span of time  but confined only to that one place  perhaps even a peculiar ritual cleansing practiced there .  since no other ancient sites as old as those of sagikan have been found anywhere else on kalgash  we couldn t say otherwise .  but beenay s calculations have changed everything .  now we see that every two thousand and forty nine years the world is apparently  plunged into darkness .  as sheerin says  fires would be lit .  and would get out of control .  whatever other settlements existed at the time of the thombo fires  anywhere in the world  would have been destroyed just as the thombo cities were  and for the same reason .  but thombo is all we have left from the prehistoric era .  as the apostles of flame say of it  it is a holy place  the place where the gods have made themselves manifest to humanity .    and perhaps are making themselves manifest once more   said athor darkly .   by providing us with evidence of the fires of past epochs .   beenay looked at him .   so you have come to believe the apostles  teachings  sir .   to athor  beenay s statement seemed almost like a blunt accusation of madness .  it was a moment before he could reply .  but then he said  as calmly as he could   believe them .  no .  no  not quite .  but they interest me  beenay .  i m horrified at the need even to pose this question  but what if the apostles are right .  we have clear indications now that darkness does come at just the two thousand and forty nine year interval that they ve mentioned in their book of revelations .  sheerin here says that the world would go mad if that happened  and we have siferra s evidence that one small section of the world  at least  did go mad  again and again  its houses swept by fire at that two thousand and forty nine year interval that we keep coming upon .    what are you suggesting  then .   beenay asked .   that we join the apostles .   again athor had to fight off anger .   no  beenay .  simply that we look into their beliefs and see what sort of use we can make of them .    use .   cried sheerin and siferra  almost at the same moment .   yes .  use .   athor knotted his great gaunt hands together and swung around to face them all .   don t you see that the survival of human civilization may depend entirely on the four of us .  it comes down to just that  doesn t it .  melodramatic as it sounds  we four are in possession of what is beginning to look like incontrovertible proof that the end of the world is sweeping down on us .  universal darkness bringing universal madness a worldwide conflagration our cities in flames  our society shattered .  but there is already in existence another group that has been predicting  on the basis of who knows what evidence  the very same calamity to the year  to the day .    theptar nineteenth   beenay murmured .   theptar nineteenth  yes .  the day when only dovim will shine in the sky and  if we are right  kalgash two will arrive  rising out of its invisibility to fill our sky and blot out all light .  that day  the apostles tell us  fire will engulf our cities .  how do they know .  a lucky guess .  mere myth spinning .    some of what they say makes no sense at all   beenay pointed out .   for example  they say stars will appear in the heavens .  what are stars .  where are they going to come from .   athor shrugged .   i have no idea .  that part of the apostles  teachings may very well be a fable .  but they seem to have some sort of record of past eclipses  out of which they ve built their current dire predictions .  we need to know more about those records .    why us .   beenay asked .   because we as scientists can serve as leaders  figures of authority  in the struggle to save civilization that lies ahead   said athor .   only if the nature of the danger is made known right here and now does society stand any chance of protecting itself against what s going to happen .  but as it is  only the gullible and ignorant pay any heed to the apostles .  most intelligent  rational folk look upon them the same way we do as cranks  as fools  as madmen  perhaps as swindlers .  what we need to do is persuade the apostles to share their astronomical and archaelogical data  if they have any  with us .  and then we go public .  we reveal our findings  and we back them up with the material we receive  if we do  from the apostles .  in essence we form an alliance with them against the chaos that both we and they think is coming .  that way we can gain the attention of all strata of society  from the most credulous to the most critical .    so you want us to stop being scientists and enter the world of politics .   siferra asked .   i don t like that .  this isn t our job at all .  i vote for turning our material over to the government  and letting them    the government .   beenay snorted .   beenay s right   said sheerin .   i know what government people are like .  they ll form a committee  and issue a report  eventually and file the report away  and then later on they ll form another committee to dig out whatever it  was that the first committee discovered  and then take a vote  and  no  we don t have the time for all that .  it s our duty to speak out ourselves .  i know at first hand what darkness does to people s minds .  athor and beenay  you have mathematical proof that darkness is coming soon .  you  siferra  you ve seen what darkness has done to past civilizations .    but do we dare seek out the apostles .   beenay asked .   won t we be endangering our own reputations for scientific responsibility if we have anything to do with them .    good point   siferra said .   we have to keep away from them .   athor frowned .   perhaps you re right .  it may have been naive of me to suggest that we could form any sort of working partnership with those people .  i withdraw the suggestion .    wait   said beenay .   i have a friend you know him  sheerin  he s the newspaperman theremon who s already been in touch with some high official of the apostles .  he might be able to arrange a secret meeting between athor and that high apostle .  you could sound the apostles out  sir  and see if they know anything worth our having just by way of obtaining even more confirming evidence for ourselves and we can always deny the meeting took place  if it turns out they don t .    that s a possibility   athor said .   distasteful as it would be  i d be willing to meet with them .   i assume  then  that none of you has any fundamental dispute now with my basic suggestion .  you agree with me that it s essential that we four take some action in response to what we ve discovered .    i do now   beenay said  glancing at sheerin .   i still intend to survive the darkness myself .  but everything that s been said here today leads me to realize that a lot of others won t .  nor will civilization itself unless we do something .   athor nodded .   very well .  talk to your friend theremon .  cautiously  though .  you know how i feel about the press .  journalists aren t much more to my liking than the apostles are .  but very carefully let your theremon understand that i d like to meet privately with this apostle he knows .    i will  sir .    you  sheerin  get together all the literature you can find concerning the effects of exposure to prolonged darkness  and let me have it .    no problem there  doctor .    and you  siferra may i have a report  suitable for the understanding of laymen  on your thombo excavation .  with every scrap of evidence you are able to supply concerning this repetitive conflagration business .    some of it s not ready yet  dr .  athor .  material i didn t discuss today .   athor s brows furrowed .   what do you mean .    inscribed clay tablets   she said .   found in the third and fifth levels from the top .  dr .  mudrin is attempting the very difficult task of translating them .  his preliminary opinion is that they re some kind of priestly warning of the coming fire .    the first edition of the book of revelations .   beenay shouted .   well  yes  perhaps that is what they are   siferra said  laughing without much sign of amusement .   at any rate  i hope to have the tablet texts soon .  and then i ll get all the material together for you  dr .  athor .    good   athor said .   we ll need everything we can get .  this is going to be the job of our lives .   he glanced once more at each of the others in turn .   one important thing to remember  though  my willingness to engage in an approach to the apostles does not mean that i intend in any way to provide a blanket of respectability for them .  i merely hope to find out what they have that will help us to convince the world of what s about to happen  period .  otherwise i ll do what i can to distance myself from them .  i want no mysticism involved here .  i don t believe a shred of their mumbo jumbo i simply want to know how they ve arrived at their conclusions of catastrophe .  and i want the rest of you to be similarly on your guard in any dealings with them .  understood .    this is all like a dream   beenay said softly .   a very bad one   said athor .   every atom in my soul cries out that this isn t happening  that it s utter fantasy  that the world will keep right on going past next theptar nineteenth without any harm coming to it .  unfortunately  the figures tell the story .   he looked out the window .  onos now was gone from the sky  and dovim was only a dot against the horizon .  twilight had descended  and the only real illumination that was visible was the ghostly  uncomforting light of patru and trey .   there s no longer any way for us to doubt it .  darkness will come .  perhaps the stars  whatever they may be  really will shine forth .  fires will blaze .  the end of the world as we know it is at hand .  the end of the world .     you d better be careful   beenay said .  he was beginning to feel tense .  evening was coming on the evening of the eclipse  so long awaited by him with fear and trembling .   athor s furious with you  theremon .  i can t believe you came here now .  you know you re not supposed to be anywhere on the premises .  especially not this evening  of all times to show up .  you ought to be able to understand that  when you consider the sort of things you ve been writing about him lately   the journalist chuckled .   i told you .  i can calm him down .    don t be too sure of that  theremon .  you basically called him a superannuated crackbrain in your column  remember .  the old man s calm and steely most of the time  but when he s pushed too far he s got an amazing temper .   theremon said  with a shrug   look  beenay  before i was a big shot columnist i was a kid reporter who specialized in doing all sorts of impossible interviews  and i mean impossible .  i d come home every evening with bruises  black eyes  sometimes a broken bone or two  but i always got my story .  you develop a certain degree of confidence in yourself after you ve spent a few years routinely driving people out of their minds for the sake of getting a story .  i ll be able to take care of athor .    driving people out of their minds .   beenay said .  he glanced meaningfully toward the calendar plate high in the wall of the corridor .  in gleaming green letters it announced the date     theptar .  the day of days  the one that had been blazing in everyone s mind  here at the observatory  month after month .  the last day of sanity that many  perhaps most  of the people of kalgash would ever know .   not the best choice of words this evening  wouldn t you say .   theremon smiled .   maybe you re right .  we ll see .   he pointed toward the closed door of athor s office .   who s in there right now .    athor  of course .  and thilanda she s one of the astronomers .  davnit  simbron  hikkinan  all observatory staffers .  that s about it .    what about siferra .  she said she d be here .    well  she isn t  not yet .   a look of surprise appeared on theremon s face .   really .  when i asked her the other day if she would opt for the sanctuary she practically laughed in my face .  she was dead set on watching the eclipse from here .  i can t believe she s changed her mind .  that woman isn t afraid of anything  beenay .  well  maybe she s tidying up a few last minute things over at her office .    very likely .    and our chubby friend sheerin .  he s not here either .    no  not sheerin .  he s in the sanctuary .    not the bravest of men  is he  our sheerin .    at least he s got the good sense to admit it .  raissta s at the sanctuary too  and athor s wife nyilda  and just about everybody else i know  except us few observatory people .  if you were smart you d be there yourself  theremon .  when the darkness gets here this evening you ll wish that you were .    the apostle folimun    said more or less the same thing to me over a year ago  only it was his sanctuary he was inviting me into  not yours .  but i m fully prepared to face the worst terrors the gods can throw at me  my friend .  there s a story to cover this evening  and i won t be able to cover it if i m holed up in some snug little underground hideout  will i .    there won t be any newspaper tomorrow for you to write that story for  theremon    you think so .   theremon caught beenay by the arm and drew close to him  almost nose to nose .  in a low  intense tone he said   tell me this  beenay .  just between friends .  do you actually and truly think that any such incredible thing as nightfall is going to happen this evening .    yes .  i do .    gods .  are you serious  man .    as serious as i ve ever been in my life  theremon .    i can t believe it .  you seem so steady  beenay .  so solid  so responsible .  and yet you ve taken a bunch of admittedly speculative astronomical calculations  and some bits of charcoal dug up in a desert thousands of miles from here  and some wild frothings out of the mouths of a crew of wild eyed cultists  and rolled them up together into the craziest damned mess of apocalyptic nonsense i ever    it isn t crazy   beenay insisted quietly .   it isn t nonsense .    so the world is really coming to an end this evening .    the world we know and love  yes .   theremon released his grip on beenay s arm and threw his hands up in exasperation .   gods .  even you .  by darkness  beenay  i ve been trying for better than a year to put some faith in all this stuff  and i can t  i absolutely can t .  no matter what you say  or athor  or siferra  or folimun     or mondior  or    just wait   beenay said .   only another few hours .    you really are sincere .   theremon said wonderingly .   by all the gods  you re as big a crackpot as mondior himself .  bah .  that s what i say  beenay .  bab .   take me in to see athor  will you .    i warn you  he doesn t want to see you .    you said that already .  take me in there anyway .    theremon had never really expected to find himself taking a stance hostile to the observatory scientists .  things had simply worked out that way  very gradually  in the months leading up to the nineteenth of theptar .  it was basically a matter of journalistic integrity  he told himself .  beenay was his longtime friend  yes  dr .  athor was unquestionably a great astronomer  sheerin was genial and straightforward and likable  and siferra was well  an attractive and interesting woman and an important archaeologist .  he had no desire at all to position himself as an enemy of such people .  but he had to write what he believed .  and what he believed  to the depths of his soul  was that the observatory group was every bit as loopy as the apostles of flame  and just as dangerous to the stability of society .  there was no way he could make himself take what they said seriously .  the more time he spent around the observatory  the nuttier it all seemed to him .  an invisible and apparently undetectable planet soaring through the sky on an orbit that brought it close to kalgash every few decades .  a combination of solar positions that would leave only dovim overhead when the invisible planet arrived this time .  dovim s light thereby blotted out  throwing the world into darkness .  and everyone going insane as a result .  no  no  he couldn t buy it .  to theremon  all of it seemed just as wild as the stuff the apostles of flame had been peddling for so many years .  the only extra thing that the apostles threw in was the mysterious advent of the phenomenon known as stars .  even the observatory people had the good grace to admit that they couldn t imagine what stars were .  some other sort of invisible heavenly bodies  apparently  which suddenly came into view when the year of godliness ended and the wrath of the gods descended on kalgash so the apostles indicated .   it can t be   beenay had told him  one evening at the six suns club .  it was still six months before the date of the eclipse .   the eclipse and the darkness  yes .  the stars  no .  there s nothing in the universe except our world and the six suns and some insignificant asteroids and kalgash two .  if there are stars also  why can t we measure their presence .  why can t we detect them by orbital perturbations  the way we ve detected kalgash two .  no  theremon  if there are stars out there  then something s got to be wrong with the theory of universal gravitation .  and we know the theory s all right .    we know the theory s all right   that was what beenay had said .  but wasn t that just like folimun saying   we know that the book of revelations is a book of truth  .  in the beginning  when beenay and sheerin first told him of their emerging awareness that there was going to be a devastating period of darkness upon all the world  theremon  half skeptical and half awed and impressed by their apocalyptic visions  had indeed done his best to be helpful .   athor wants to meet with folimun   beenay said .   he s trying to find out if the apostles have any sort of ancient astronomical records that might confirm what we ve found .  can you do anything to arrange it .    a funny notion   theremon said .   the irascible old man of science asking to see the spokesman of the force s of anti science  of non science .  but i ll see what i can do .   that meeting had turned out to be surprisingly easy to arrange .  theremon had been intending to interview folimun again anyway .  the sharp faced apostle granted theremon an audience for the following day .   athor .   folimun said  when the newspaperman had passed beenay s message along .   why would he want to see me .    perhaps he s planning to become an apostle   theremon suggested playfully .  folimun laughed .   not very likely .  from what i know of him  he d sooner paint himself purple and go for a stroll in the nude down saro boulevard .    well  maybe he s undergone a conversion   said theremon .  cautiously he added  after a tantalizing pause   i know for a fact that he and his staff have turned up some data that might just tend to support your belief that darkness is going to sweep over the world on the nineteenth of theptar next .   folimun allowed himself the smallest sort of carefully controlled display of interest  an almost imperceptible raising of one eyebrow .   how fascinating  if it s true   he said calmly .   you ll have to see him yourself to find that out .    i may just do that   the apostle said .  and indeed he did .  exactly what the nature of the meeting between folimun and athor was  theremon never succeeded in finding out  despite all his best efforts .  athor and folimun were the only ones present  and neither of them said a thing to anyone else about it afterward  so far as theremon could discover .  beenay  theremon s chief link to the observatory  was able to offer only vague guesses .   it had something to do with the ancient astronomical records that the chief believes are in the apostles  possession  that s all i can tell you   beenay reported .   athor suspects that they ve been handing things down over the centuries  maybe even since before the last eclipse .  some of the passages in the book of revelations are in an old forgotten language  you know .    old forgotten gibberish  you mean .  nobody s ever been able to make any sense out of that stuff .    well  i certainly can t   said beenay .   but it s the opinion of some quite respectable philologists that those passages may be actual prehistoric texts .  what if the apostles actually have a way of deciphering that language .  but they keep it to themselves  thus concealing whatever astronomical data may be recorded in the book of revelations .  that may be the key athor s after .   theremon was astonished .   you mean to say that the preeminent astronomer of our time  perhaps of all time  feels the need to consult a pack of hysterical cultists on a scientific issue .   with a shrug  beenay said   all i know is that athor doesn t like the apostles and their teachings any more than you do  but he thought there was something important to gain by meeting with your friend folimun .    no friend of mine .  he s strictly a professional acquaintance .   beenay said   well  whatever you want to call   theremon cut him off .  real wrath was rising in him now  a little to his own surprise .   and it s not going to sit very well with me  let me tell you  if it turns out that you people and the apostles have cut some sort of deal .  so far as i m concerned  the apostles represent darkness itself the blackest  most hateful sort of reactionary ideas .  give them their way and they ll have us all living medieval lives of fasting and chastity and flagellation again .  it s bad enough we have psychotics like them spewing forth demented delirious prophecies to disturb the tranquillity of everyday life  but if a man of athor s prestige is going to dignify those ludicrous creeps by incorporating some of their babble into his own findings  i m going to be very  very suspicious  my friend  of anything at all that emanates from your observatory from this point onward .   dismay was evident on beenay s face .   if you only knew  theremon  how scornfully athor speaks of the apostles  how little regard he has for anything they ve ever advocated    then why is he deigning to speak with them .    you ve talked with folimun yourself .    that s different .  like it or not  folimun s helping to make news these days .  it s my job to find out what s going on in his mind .    well   beenay said hotly   maybe athor takes the same view .  that was the point where they had let the discussion drop .  it was beginning to change from a discussion into a quarrel  and neither one of them wanted that .  since beenay really had no idea what kind of understanding  if any  athor and folimun might have worked out with each other  theremon saw there wasn t much sense in belaboring him about it .  but  theremon realized afterward  that conversation with beenay was exactly when his attitude toward beenay and sheerin and the rest of the observatory people had begun to shift when he had started to move from sympathetic and curious onlooker to jeering  scornful critic .  even though he himself had been instrumental in bringing it about  the meeting between the observatory director and the apostle now seemed to theremon to be a sellout of the most disastrous kind  a naive capitulation on athor s part to the forces of reaction and blind ignorance .  although he had never really been able to make himself believe the theories of the scientists despite all the so called  evidence  they had allowed him to inspect theremon had taken a generally neutral position in his column when the first news stories about the impending eclipse began to appear in the chronicle .   a startling announcement   he had called it   and very frightening if true .  as athor    quite rightly says  any prolonged period of sudden worldwide darkness would be a calamity such as the world has never known .  but from the other side of the world comes a dissenting view this morning .   with all due respect to the great athor      declares heranian       astronomer royal of the imperial observatory of kanipilitiniuk   there is still no firm evidence that the so called kalgash two satellite exists at all  let alone that it is capable of causing such an eclipse as the saro group predicts .  we must bear in mind that suns even a small sun such as dovim are immensely larger than any wandering space satellite could possibly be  and it strikes us as highly unlikely that such a satellite would be able to enter precisely the position in the heavens necessary to intercept all solar illumination that might reach the surface of our world    but then came mondior    s speech of umilithar thirteenth  in which the high apostle proudly declared that the world s greatest man of science had given his support to the word of the book of revelations .   the voice of science is now one with the voice of heaven   mondior cried .   i urge you now  put no further hope in miracles and dreams .  what must come must come .  nothing can save the world from the wrath of the gods  nothing except a willingness to abandon sin  to give up evil  to devote oneself to the path of virtue and righteousness .   mondior s booming pronouncement had pushed theremon out of his neutrality .  in loyalty to beenay s friendship he had allowed himself to take the eclipse hypothesis more or less seriously  for a while .  but now he began to see it  as pure sillyseason stuff a bunch of earnest  self deluding scientists  swept away by their own enthusiasm for a lot of circumstantial evidence and reasoning from mere coincidence  willing to kid themselves into a belief in the century s most nonsensical bit of insanity .  the next day theremon s column asked   are you wondering how the apostles of flame ever managed to gain athor    as a convert .  of all people  the grand old man of astronomy seems about the least likely to line up in support of those robed and hooded purveyors of claptrap and abracadabra .  did some silver tongued apostle charm the great scientist out of his wits .  or is it simply the case  as we ve heard whispered behind the ivy covered walls of saro university  that the mandatory faculty retirement age has been pegged a few years too high .   and that was only the beginning .  theremon saw what role he had to play now .  if people started taking this eclipse thing seriously  there would be mental breakdowns on all sides  even without the coming of general darkness to start the trouble off .  let everyone actually begin believing that doom would arrive on the evening of theptar nineteenth  and there would be panic in the streets long before that  universal hysteria  a collapse of law and order  a prolonged period of general instability and troublesome apprehension followed by the gods only knew what sort of emotional upheavals when the dreaded day came and went harmlessly .  it would have to be his task to deflate the fear of nightfall  of darkness  of doomsday  by poking it with the sharp spear of laughter .  so when mondior thundered ferociously that the vengeance of the gods was on the way  theremon     replied with lighthearted sketches of what the world would be like if the apostles succeeded in  reforming  society as they wanted to people going to the beach bundled up in ankle length swimsuits  long sessions of prayer between each bit of action at sports events  all the great books and classic plays and shows rewritten to eliminate the slightest hint of impiety .  and when athor and his group released diagrams showing the movements of the unseen and apparently unseeable kalgash two across the sky on its shadowy rendezvous with the pallid red light of dovim  theremon made amiable remarks about dragons  invisible giants  and other mythological monsters cavorting through the heavens .  when mondior waved the scientific authority of athor    around as an argument demonstrating secular support of the apostles  teachings  theremon responded by asking how seriously anyone could take athor    s scientific authority  now that he was obviously just as deranged as mondior himself .  when athor called for a crash program to store food supplies  scientific and technical information  and everything else that would be needed by mankind after the general insanity broke loose  theremon suggested that in some quarters the general insanity had already broken loose  and provided his own list of essential items to put away in your basement   can openers  thumbtacks  copies of the multiplication table  playing cards .   .   .   .  don t forget to write your name on a tag and tie it around your right wrist  in case you don t remember it after the darkness comes .   .   .   .  put a tag on your left wrist that says  to find out your name  see tag on other wrist .   .   .  by the time theremon had finished working the story over  it was hard for his readers to decide which group was more absurd the ripsnorting doomsayers of the apostles of flame  or the pathetic  gullible skywatchers of the saro university observatory .  but one thing was certain  thanks to theremon  hardly any member of the general public believed that anything out of the ordinary was going to take place on the evening of theptar nineteenth .   athor thrust out a belligerent lower lip and glared in rage at the man from the chronicle .  he was able to restrain himself only by a supreme effort .   you here .  despite everything i said .  of all the audacity .   theremon s hand was outstretched in greeting as though he really had expected athor to accept it .  but after a moment he lowered it  and stood regarding the observatory director with astonishing insouciance .  in a voice trembling with barely controlled emotion athor said   you display an infernal gall  sir  in coming here this evening .  it astounds me that you d dare to show your face among us .   from a corner of the room  beenay  running the tip of his tongue nervously across his lips  interposed nervously   now  sir  after all    did you invite him to be here .  when you knew i had expressly forbidden    sir  i    it was dr .  siferra   theremon said .   she urged me very vigorously to come .  i m here at her invitation .    siferra .  siferra .  i doubt that very much .  she told me only a few weeks ago that she thinks you re an irresponsible fool .  she spoke of you in the harshest possible manner .   athor looked around .   where is she  by the way .  she was supposed to be here  wasn t she .   no answer came .  turning to beenay  athor said   you re the one who brought this newspaperman in  beenay .  i m utterly amazed that you d do such a thing .  this isn t the moment for insubordination .  the observatory is closed to journalists this evening .  and it s been closed to this particular journalist for a long time now .  show him out at once .    director athor   theremon said   if you ll only let me explain what my reason for    i don t believe  young man  that anything you could say now would do much to outweigh your insufferable daily columns of these last two months .  you have led a vast newspaper campaign against the efforts of my colleagues and myself to organize the world against the menace that is about to overwhelm us .  you have done your best with your highly personal attacks to make the staff of this observatory objects of ridicule .   he lifted the copy of the saro city chronicle on the table and shook it at theremon furiously .   even a person of your wellknown impudence should have hesitated before coming to me with a request that he be allowed to cover today s events for this paper .  of all newsmen you .   athor dashed the newspaper to the floor  strode to the window  and clasped his arms behind his back .   you are to leave immediately   he snapped over his shoulder .   beenay  get him out of here .   athor s head was throbbing .  it was important  he knew  to get his anger under control .  he could not afford to allow anything to distract him from the vast and cataclysmic event that was about to occur .  moodily he stared out at the saro city skyline and forced himself back toward calmness  as much calmness as he was likely to be able to attain this evening .  onos was beginning now to sink toward the horizon .  in a little while it would fade and vanish into the distant mists .  athor watched it as it descended .  he knew he would never see it again as a sane man .  the cold white gleam of sitha also was visible  low in the sky  far across the city at the other end of the horizon .  sitha s twin  tano  was nowhere to be seen already set  gliding now through the skies of the opposite hemisphere  which soon would be enjoying the extraordinary phenomenon of a five sun day and sitha itself was also swiftly vanishing from view .  in another moment it too would disappear .  behind him he heard beenay and theremon whispering .   is that man still here .   athor asked ominously .  beenay said   sir  i think you ought to listen to what he has to tell you .    you do .  you think i ought to listen to him .   athor whirled  his eyes gleaming fiercely .   oh  no  beenay .  no  he ll be the one to listen to me .   he beckoned peremptorily to the newspaperman  who had made no motion at all to leave .   come here  young man .  i ll give you your story .   theremon walked slowly toward him .  athor gestured outward .   sitha is about to set no  it already has .  onos will be gone also  in another moment or two .  of all the six suns  only dovim will be left in the sky .  do you see it .   the question was scarcely necessary to ask .  the red dwarf sun looked even smaller than usual this evening  smaller than it had appeared in decades .  but it was almost at zenith  and its ruddy light streamed down awesomely  flooding the landscape with an extraordinary blood red illumination as the brilliant rays of setting onos died .  athor s upturned face flushed redly in the dovim light .   in just under four hours   he said   civilization  as we have known it  will come to an end .  it will do so because  as you see  dovim will be the only sun in the sky .   he narrowed his eyes  stared toward the horizon .  the last yellow blink of onos now was gone .   there .  dovim is alone .  we have four hours  now  until the finish of everything .  print that .  but there ll be no one to read it .    but if it turns out that four hours pass and another four  and nothing happens .   asked theremon softly .   don t let that worry you .  plenty will happen  i assure you .    perhaps .  but if it doesn t .   athor fought against his rising rage .   if you don t leave  sir  and beenay refuses to conduct you out  then i ll call the university guards  and  no .  on civilization s last evening  i ll allow no discourtesies here .  you have five minutes  young man  to say what you have come here to say .  at the end of that time  i will either agree to allow you to stay to view the eclipse  or you will leave of your own accord .  is that understood .   theremon hesitated only a moment .   fair enough .   athor took out his pocket watch .   five minutes  then .    good .  all right  first thing  what difference would it make if you allowed me to take down an eyewitness account of what s to come .  if your prediction comes true  my presence won t matter at all the world will end  there ll be no newspaper tomorrow  i won t be able to hurt you in anyway .  on the other hand  what if there isn  t any eclipse .  you people will be the subject of such ridicule as the world has never known .  don t you think it would be wise to leave that ridicule to friendly hands .   athor snorted .   do you mean your hands .    certainly .   theremon flung himself down casually in the most comfortable chair in the room and crossed his legs .   my columns may have been a little rough at times  agreed  but i let you people have the benefit of the doubt whenever possible .  beenay s a friend of mine  after all .  he s the one who first gave me an inkling of what was going on here  and you may recall that at the beginning i was quite sympathetic to your research .  but i ask you  dr .  athor how can you  one of the greatest of all scientists in all of history  turn your back on the awareness that the present century is a time of the triumph of reason over superstition  of fact over fantasy  of knowledge over blind fear .  the apostles of flame are an absurd anachronism .  the book of revelations is a muddled mass of foolishness .  everyone intelligent  everyone modern  knows that .  and so people are annoyed  even angered  to have scientists turn about face and tell us that these cultists are preaching the truth .  they    no such thing  young man   interrupted athor .   while some of our data has been supplied us by the apostles  our results contain none of the apostles  mysticism .  facts are facts  and there s no denying that the apostles  so called  foolishness  does have certain facts behind it .  we discovered that to our own chagrin  let me assure you .  but we ve scorned their mythologizing and done whatever we could to separate their quite genuine warnings of impending disaster from their quite preposterous and untenable program for transforming and  reforming  society .  i assure you that the apostles hate us now even more than you do .    i don t hate you .  i m just trying to tell you that the public is in an ugly humor .  they re angry .   athor twisted his mouth in derision .   let them be angry .    yes  but what about tomorrow .    there ll be no tomorrow .    but if there is .  say that there is just for the sake of argument .  that anger might take shape as something serious .  after all  you know  the whole financial world s been in a nose dive the last few months .  the stock market has crashed three separate times  or haven t you noticed .  sensible investors don t really believe the world is coming to an end  but they think other investors might start to think so  and so the smart ones sell out before the panic begins thus touching off the panic themselves .  and then they buy back afterward  and sell again as soon as the market rallies  and begin the whole downward cycle all over again .  and what do you think has happened to business .  johnny public doesn t believe you either  but there s no sense buying new porch furniture just now  is there .  better to hang on to your money  just in case  or put it into canned goods and ammunition  and let the furniture wait .   you see the point  dr .  athor .  just as soon as this is all over  the business interests will be after your hide .  they ll say that if crackpots begging your pardon crackpots in the guise of serious scientists can upset the world s entire economy any time they want simply by making some cockeyed prediction  then it s up to the world to keep such things from happening .  the sparks will fly  doctor .   athor regarded the columnist indifferently .  the five minutes were almost up .   and just what were you proposing to do to help the situation .    well   theremon said  grinning   what i have in mind is this  starting tomorrow  i ll serve as your unofficial public relations representative .  by which i mean that i can try to quell the anger you re going to face  the same way that i ve been trying to ease the tension the nation has been feeling through humor  through ridicule  if necessary .  i know i know it would be hard to stand  i admit  because i d have to make you all out to be a bunch of gibbering idiots .  but if i can get people laughing at you  they might just forget to be angry .  in return for that  all i ask is the exclusive right to cover the scene at the observatory this evening .   athor was silent .  beenay burst out   sir  it s worth considering .  i know that we ve examined every possibility  but there s always a million to one chance  a billion to one chance  that there s an error somewhere in our theory or in our calculations .  and if there is   the others in the room were murmuring now  and it sounded to athor like murmurs of agreement .  by the gods  was the whole department turning against him .  athor s expression became that of one who found his mouth full of something bitter and couldn t get rid of it .   let you remain with us so that you ll be better able to ridicule us tomorrow .  you must think i m far gone in senility  young man .   theremon said   but i ve explained that my being here won t make any difference .  if there is an eclipse  if darkness does come  you can expect nothing but the most reverent treatment from me  and all the help i can give in any crisis that might follow .  and if nothing unusual happens after all  i m willing to offer my services in the hope of protecting you  dr .  athor  against the wrath of the angry citizens who    please   a new voice said .   let him stay  dr .  athor .   athor looked around .  siferra had come in  unnoticed by him .   i m sorry i m late .  we had a little last minute problem at the archaeology office that upset things a little  and   she and theremon exchanged glances .  to athor she said   please don t be offended .  i know how cruelly he s mocked us .  but i asked him to come here this evening  so that he could find out at first hand that we really were right .  he s my guest  doctor .   athor closed his eyes a moment .  siferra s guest .  it was too much .  why not invite folimun too .  why not invite mondior .  but he had lost his appetite for further dispute .  time was running short .  and obviously none of the others minded having theremon here during the eclipse .  what did it matter .  what did anything matter now .  resignedly athor said   all right .  stay  if that s what you want .  but you will kindly refrain from hampering us in our duties in any fashion .  understood .  you ll keep out of the way as much as possible .  you will also remember that i am in charge of all activities here  and in spite of your opinions as expressed in your columns  i will expect full cooperation and full respect    siferra crossed the room to theremon s side and said quietly   i didn t seriously expect you to come here this evening .    why not .  the invitation was serious  wasn t it .    of course .  but you were so savage in your mockery  in all those columns you wrote about us so cruel     irresponsible  is the word you used   theremon said .  she reddened .   that too .  i didn t imagine you d be able to look athor in the eye after all those horrid things you said about him .    i ll do more than look him in the eye  if it turns out that his dire predictions were on the mark .  i ll go down on both knees before him and humbly beg his pardon .    and if his predictions turn out not to have been on the mark .    then he ll need me   theremon said .   you all will .  this is the right place for me to be  this evening .   siferra gave the newspaperman a startled glance .  he was always saying the unexpected thing .  she hadn t managed to figure him out yet .  she disliked him  of course that went without saying .  everything about him his profession  his manner of speaking  the flashy clothes he usually wore struck her as tawdry and commonplace .  his entire persona was a symbol  to her  of the crude  crass  dreary  ordinary  repellent world beyond the university walls that she had always detested .  and yet  and yet  and yet  there were aspects of this theremon that had managed to win her grudging admiration  despite everything .  he was tough  for one thing  absolutely unswervable in his pursuit of whatever he might be after .  she could appreciate that .  he was straightforward  even blunt  quite a contrast to the slippery  manipulative  power chasing academic types who swarmed all around her on the campus .  he was intelligent  too  no question about that  even though he had chosen to devote his particular brand of sinewy  probing intelligence to a trivial  meaningless field like newspaper journalism .  and she respected his robust physical vigor  he was tall and sturdy looking and in obvious good health .  siferra had never had much esteem for weaklings .  she had taken good care not to be one herself .  in truth she realized improbable as it was  uhcomfortable as it made her feel that in some way she was attracted to him .  an attraction of opposites .  she thought .  yes  yes  that was an accurate way of putting it .  but not entirely .  beneath the surface dissimilarities  siferra knew  she had more in common with theremon than she was willing to admit .  she looked uneasily toward the window .   getting dark out there   she said .   darker than i ve ever seen it before .    frightened .   theremon asked .   of the darkness .  no  not really .  but i m frightened of what s going to come after it .  you should be too .    what s going to come after it   he said   is onos rise  and i suppose some of the other suns will be shining too  and everything s going to be . as it was before .    you sound very confident of that .   theremon laughed .   onos has risen every morning of my life .  why shouldn t i be confident it ll rise tomorrow .   siferra shook her head .  he was beginning to annoy her again with his pigheadedness .  hard to believe that she had been telling herself only moments before that she found him attractive .  she said coolly   onos will rise tomorrow .  and will look down on such a scene of devastation as a person of your limited imagination is evidently incapable of anticipating .    everything on fire  you mean .  and everyone walking around drooling and gibbering while the city burns .    the archaeological evidence indicates    fires  yes .  repeated holocausts .  but only in one small site  thousands of miles from here and thousands of years ago .   theremon s eyes flashed with sudden vitality .   and where s your archaeological evidence for outbreaks of mass insanity .  are you extrapolating from all those fires .  how can you be sure that those weren t purely ritual fires  lit by perfectly sane men and women in the hope that they would bring back the suns and banish the darkness .  fire which got out of hand each time and caused widespread damage  sure  but which were in no way related to any mental impairment on the part of the population .   she gazed at him levelly .   there s archaeological evidence of that too .  the widespread mental impairment  i mean .    there is .    the tablet texts .  which only this morning we just finished keying in against the philological data provided by the apostles of flame   theremon guffawed .   the apostles of flame .  wonderful .  so you re an apostle too .  what a shame  siferra .  a woman with a figure like yours  and from now on you ll have to muffle yourself up in one of those terrible shapeless bulky robes of theirs    oh .   she cried  stifling a red burst of anger and loathing .   you don t know how to do anything but mock  do you .  you re so convinced of your own righteousness that even when you re staring right at the truth all you can do is make  some pitiful joke .  oh you you impossible man   she swung around and headed swiftly across the room .   siferra siferra  wait   she ignored him .  her heart was pounding in rage .  she saw now that it had been a terrible mistake to invite someone like theremon to be here on the evening of the eclipse .  a mistake  in fact  ever to have had anything to do with him .  it was beenay s fault  she thought .  everything was beenay s fault .  it was beenay  after all  who had introduced her to theremon  one day at the faculty club many months before .  apparently the newspaperman and the young astronomer had known each other a long time and theremon regularly consulted beenay on scientific matters that were making news .  what was making news just then was the prediction of mondior    that the world would end on theptar nineteenth  which at that time was something close to a year in the future .  of course nobody at the university held mondior and his apostles in any sort of regard  but it was just about at the same moment that beenay had come up with his observations of the apparent irregularities in kalgash s orbit  and siferra had reported her findings of fires at two thousand year intervals at the hill of thombo .  both of which discoveries  of course  had the dismaying quality of reinforcing the plausibility of the apostles  beliefs .  theremon had seemed to know all about siferra s work at thombo .  when the newspaperman entered the faculty club  siferra and beenay were already there  though not by any prearranged appointment beenay merely had to say   theremon  this is my friend dr .  siferra of the archaeology department .   and theremon replied instantly   oh  yes .  the burned villages piled up on that ancient hill .   siferra smiled coolly .   you ve heard of that  have you .   beenay said quickly   i told him .  i know i promised not to say a word about it to him  but after you revealed everything to athor and sheerin and the rest  i figured that it wouldn t matter any more if i let him know so long as i swore him to secrecy i mean  siferra  i trust this man  i really do  and i was absolutely confident that    it s all right  beenay   siferra said  making an effort not to seem as annoyed as in fact she was .   you really shouldn t have said anything .  but i forgive you .   theremon said   no harm s been done .  beenay swore me to a terrible oath that i wouldn t print anything about it .  but it s fascinating .  absolutely fascinating .  how old is the one at the bottom  would you say .  fifty thousand years  is it .    more like fourteen or sixteen   siferra said .   which is quite immensely old enough  when you consider that beklimot you know of beklimot  don t you .  is only about twenty centuries old  and we used to think that was the earliest settlement on kalgash .   you aren t planning to write a story about my discoveries  are you .    i wasn t  actually .  i told you  i gave beenay my word .  besides  it seemed a little abstract for the chronicle s readers  a little remote from their daily concerns .  but i think now there s a real story there .  if you d be willing to meet with me and give me the details    i d rather not   siferra said quickly .   which .  meet with me .  or give me the details .   his quick flip reply suddenly cast the entire conversation in a new light for her .  she saw  to her mild annoyance and slight surprise  that the newspaperman was in fact attracted to her .  she realized now  thinking back over the past few minutes  that theremon must have been wondering  all the while  whether there might be something romantic going on between her and beenay  since he had found them sitting here in the club together .  and had decided at last that there wasn t  and so had chosen to offer that first lightly flirtatious line .  well  that was his problem  siferra thought .  she said in a deliberately neutral way   i haven t published my thombo work in the scientific journals yet .  it would be best if nothing about it gets into the public press until i have .    i quite understand that .  but if i promise that i ll abide by your release date  would you be willing to go over your material with me ahead of time .    well   she looked at beenay .  what was a newspaperman s promise worth  anyway .  beenay said   you can trust theremon .  i ve told you already  he s as honorable as they get  in his line of work .    which isn t saying much   theremon put in  laughing .   but i know better than to break my word on an issue of scientific publication priority .  if i jumped the gun on your story  beenay here would see that my name was mud all over the university .  and i depend on my university contacts for some of my most interesting stories .   so can i count on an interview with you .  say  the day after next .   and that was how it began .  theremon was very persuasive .  she agreed finally to have lunch with him  and slowly  cunningly  he pried the details of the thombo dig out of her .  afterward she regretted it she expected to see a stupid  sensational piece in the chronicle the very next day but theremon kept his word and published nothing about her .  he did ask to see her laboratory  though .  again she yielded  and he inspected the charts  the photographs  the ash samples .  he asked some intelligent questions .   you aren t going to write me up  are you .   she asked nervously .   now that you ve seen all this .    i promised that i wouldn t .  i meant it .  although the moment you tell me that you ve arranged to publish your findings in one of the scientific journals  i ll regard myself as free to tell the whole thing .  what would you say to dinner at the six suns club tomorrow evening .    well    or the evening after that .   siferra rarely went to places like the six suns .  she hated to give anyone the false impression that she was interested in getting into social entanglements .  but theremon wasn t easy to turn down .  gently  cheerfully  skillfully  he maneuvered her into a position where she couldn t avoid a date with him for ten days hence .  well  what of it .  she thought .  he was personable enough .  she could use a change of pace from the steady grind of her work .  she met him at the six suns  where everyone seemed to know him .  they had drinks  dinner  a fine wine from thamian province .  he moved the conversation this way and that  very adroitly  a little bit about her life  her fascination with archaeology  her excavations at beklimot .  he found out that she d never been married and had never been interested in marrying .  he spoke of the apostles with her  their wild prophecies  the surprising relationship of her thombo finds to mondior s claims .  everything he said was tactful  perceptive  interesting .  he was very charming and also very manipulative  she thought .  at the end of the evening he asked her gently  cheerfully  skillfully if he could accompany her home .  but she drew the line at that .  he didn t seem troubled .  he simply asked her out again .  they had gone out two or three more times altogether after that  over a period of perhaps two months .  the format was the same each time  dinner at some elegant place  well managed conversation  ultimately a delicately constructed invitation for her to spend the sleep period with him .  siferra deflected him just as delicately each time .  it was becoming a pleasant game  this lighthearted pursuit .  she wondered how long it would go on .  she still had no particular wish to go to bed with him  but the odd thing was that she had no particular wish any longer not to go to bed with him  either .  it was a long time since she had felt that way about any man .  then came the first of the series of columns in which he denounced the observatory theories  questioned athor s sanity  compared the scientists  prediction of the eclipse to the mad ravings of the apostles of flame .  siferra didn t believe it  at first .  was this some sort of joke .  beenay s friend her friend now  for that matter attacking them so viciously .  a couple of months went by .  the attacks continued .  she didn t hear from theremon .  finally she couldn t remain silent any longer .  she called him at the newspaper office .   siferra .  what a delight .  believe it or not  i was going to call you later this afternoon  to ask if you d be interested in going to     i wouldn t   she said .   theremon  what are you doing .    doing .    these columns about athor and the observatory .   there was silence at the other end of the line for a long while .  then he said   ah .  you re upset .    upset .  i m livid .    you think i ve been a little too harsh .  look  siferra  when you write for a large audience of ordinary folks  some of them very ordinary  you ve got to put things in black and white terms or run the risk of being misunderstood .  i can t simply say that i think athor and beenay are wrong .  i ve got to say that they re nuts .  do you follow me .    since when do you think they re wrong .  does beenay know how you feel .    well    you ve been covering the story for months .  now you ve turned around a hundred eighty degrees .  to listen to you  one would think that everyone at the campus is a disciple of mondior and that we re all out of our minds besides .  if you needed to find somebody to be the butt of your jokes  couldn t you have looked somewhere else than the university .    these aren t just jokes  siferra   theremon said quietly .   you believe what you re writing .    i do .  i honestly do .  there isn t going to be any cataclysm  that s what i think .  and here s athor pulling on the fire alarm in a crowded theater .  by my jokes  my poking a little good natured fun here and there  i m trying to tell people that they don t necessarily have to take him seriously not to panic  not to get into an uproar    what .   she cried .   but there is going to be a fire  theremon .  and you re playing a dangerous game with everyone s welfare by your mockery .  listen to me  i ve seen the ashes of past fires  fires thousands of years old .  i know what s going to happen .  the flames will come .  i have no doubt about that whatsoever .  you ve seen the evidence too .  and for you to take the position you re taking now is the most destructive imaginable thing you could do  theremon .  it s cruel and foolish and hateful .  and utterly irresponsible .    siferra    i thought you were an intelligent man .  i see now that you re exactly like all the rest of them out there .    sifer   she broke the contact .  and kept it broken  refusing to return any of his calls  until just a few weeks before the fateful day itself .  early in the month of theptar  theremon called once more  and siferra found herself on the line with him before she knew who it was .   don t hang up   he said quickly .   just give me a minute .    i d rather not .    listen  siferra .  you can hate me all you like  but i want you to know this  i m not cruel and i m not foolish .    whoever said you were .    you did  months ago  the last time we spoke .  but it isn t so .  everything i ve written in my column about the eclipse has been there because i believe it .    then you are foolish .  or stupid  at any rate .  which may be slightly different  but not any better .    i ve looked at the evidence .  i think you people have all been jumping to conclusions .   she said coldly   well  we ll all know whether that s so on the nineteenth  won t we .    i wish i could believe you  because you and beenay and the rest of you are all such fine people  so obviously dedicated and brilliant and all .  but i can t .  i m a skeptic by nature .  i have been all my life .  i can t accept any kind of dogma that other people want to sell me .  it s a serious flaw in my character  i suppose it makes me seem frivolous .  maybe i am frivolous .  but at least i m honest .  i simply don t think there ll be an eclipse  or madness  or fires .    it s no dogma  theremon .  it s a hypothesis .    that s playing with words .  i m sorry if what i ve written has offended you  but i can t help it  siferra .   she was quiet a moment .  something in his voice had oddly moved her .  she said at last   dogma  hypothesis  whatever it is  it s going to be tested in a few weeks .  i ll be at the observatory on the evening of the nineteenth .  you come there too  and we ll see which one of us is right .    but hasn t beenay told you .  athor s declared me persona non grata at the observatory .    has that ever stopped you .    he refuses even to talk to me .  you know  i have a proposal for him  something that could be of great help to him after the nineteenth when all this tremendous buildup misfires into whopping anticlimax and the world comes yelling for his skin  but beenay says there s no chance he ll talk to me at all  let alone allow me to come in that evening .    come as my guest .  my date   she said acidly .   athor ll be too busy to care .  i want you to be in the room when the sky turns black and the fires start .  i want to see the look on your face .  i want to see if you re as experienced at apologizing as you are at seduction  theremon .    that had been three weeks ago .  fleeing angrily from theremon now  siferra rushed to the far side of the room and caught sight of athor  standing by himself  looking through a set of computer printouts .  he was sadly turning the pages over and over and over as though he hoped to find a reprieve for the world buried somewhere in the dense columns .  then he looked up and saw her .  color came to her face .   dr .  athor  i feel i ought to ask your pardon for inviting that man to be here this evening  after all he s said about us  about you  about   she shook her head .   i genuinely thought it would be instructive for him to be among us when when  well  i was wrong .  he s even more shallow and foolish than i imagined .  i should never have told him to come .   wanly athor said   it scarcely is of any importance now  is it .  so long as he keeps out of my way  i hardly care whether he s here or not .  a few more hours and then nothing will make any difference .   he pointed through the window  toward the sky .   so dark .  so very dark .  and yet not nearly as dark as it will be .   i wonder where faro and yimot are .  you haven t seen them  have you .  no .   when you came in  dr .  siferra  you said there d been a last minute problem at your office .  not a serious one  i hope .    the thombo tablets have disappeared   she said .   disappeared .    they were in the artifact safe  of course .  just before i left to come over here  dr .  mudrin came to see me .  he was on his way to the sanctuary  but he wanted to check one last thing in his translation  one new notion he d had .  so we opened the safe  and nothing .  gone  all six of them .  we have copies  naturally .  but still the originals  the authentic ancient objects    how can this have happened .   athor asked .  bitterly siferra said   isn t it obvious .  the apostles have stolen them .  probably to use as some kind of holy talismans  after the the darkness has come and done its work .    are there any clues .    i m no detective  dr .  athor .  there s no evidence that would mean anything to me .  but it had to be the apostles .  they ve wanted them ever since they knew i had them .  oh  i wish i d never said a word to them about them .  i wish i d never mentioned those tablets to anyone .   athor took her by the hands .   you mustn t get so upset  my girl .   my girl .  she glared at him  astonished .  no one had called her that in twenty five years .  but she choked back her anger .  he was old  after all .  and only trying to be kind .  he said   let them have them  siferra .  it makes no difference now .  thanks to that man over there  nothing makes any difference  does it .   she shrugged .   i still hate the thought that some thief in an apostle s robe was sniffing around in my office jimmying my safe taking things that i had uncovered with my own hands .  it s like a violation of my body  almost .  can you understand that  dr .  athor .  to have been robbed of those tablets it s almost like a rape .    i know how upset you are   athor said  in a tone that indicated he didn t really understand at all .   look look there .  how bright dovim is this evening .  and in just a little while how dark everything will be .   she managed a vague smile and turned away from him .  all about her  people were buzzing to and fro  checking this  discussing that  running to the window  pointing  murmuring .  now and then someone would come rushing in with some new data from the telescope dome .  she felt like a complete outsider among these astronomers .  and altogether bleak  altogether hopeless .  some of athor s fatalism must have rubbed off on me  she thought .  he seemed so depressed  so lost .  it wasn t at all like him to be that way .  she wanted to remind him that it wasn t the  world that would end this evening  it was just the present cycle of civilization .  they would rebuild .  those who had gone into hiding would come forth and start everything over  as had happened a dozen times before or twenty  or a hundred since the beginning of civilization on kalgash .  but for her to tell athor that would probably do no more good than for him to have told her not to worry about the loss of the tablets .  he had hoped all the world would prepare itself against the catastrophe .  and instead only a small fraction had paid any heed to the warning .  just those few who had gone to the university sanctuary  and whatever other sanctuaries might have been set up elsewhere  beenay came over to her .   what s this i hear from athor .  the tablets are gone .    gone  yes .  stolen .  i knew i never should have allowed myself to have any sort of contact with the apostles .   beenay said   you think they stole them .    i m sure of it   she said bitterly .   they sent word to me  after the existence of the thombo tablets first became a matter of public knowledge  that they had information that would be of use to me .  didn t i tell you .  i guess not .  what they wanted was a deal similar to the one athor worked out with that high priest  or whatever he is  folimun    .   we have maintained a knowledge of the old language   folimun said   the language spoken in the previous year of godliness .   and so they had  apparently texts of some sort  dictionaries  alphabets of the old script  perhaps a lot more .    which athor was able to obtain from them .    some of it .  enough  at any rate  to determine that the apostles did have genuine astronomical records of the previous eclipse enough  athor said  to prove that the world had been through such a cataclysm at least once before .   athor  she went on to tell beenay  had given her copies of the few astronomical text fragments he had received from folimun  and she had shown them to mudrin .  who indeed had found them valuable in his own translation of the tablets .  but siferra had balked at sharing her tablets with the apostles  at least not on their terms .  the apostles claimed to be in possession of a key to the early clay tablet script  and perhaps they were .  folimun had insisted  though  that she give him the actual tablets to be copied and translated  rather than his giving her the decoding material that he had .  he wouldn t settle for copies of the tablet texts .  it had to be the original artifacts  or else no deal .   but you drew the line at that   beenay said .   absolutely .  the tablets mustn t leave the university .   give us the textual key   i said to folimun   and we ll provide you with copies of the tablet texts .  then we can each attempt a translation .   but folimun had refused .  copies of the texts were of no use to him  since they could all too easily be dismissed as forgeries .  as for giving her his own documents  no  absolutely not .  what he had  he said  was sacred material  which could only be made available to apostles .  give him the tablets and he would provide translations of them for her .  but no outsider was going to get a look at the texts already in his possession .   i was actually tempted to join the apostles for a moment   siferra said   just for the sake of getting access to the key .    you .  an apostle .    only to get their textual material .  but the idea repelled me .  i turned folimun down .   and mudrin had had to toil on at his translations without the help of whatever material the apostles might have .  it became apparent that the tablets did indeed seem to talk about some fiery doom that the gods had sent upon the world but mudrin s translations were sketchy  hesitant  sparse .  well  now the apostles had the tablets anyway  more likely than not .  that was hard to take .  in the chaos ahead  they d be waving those tablets around her tablets as still more evidence of their own wisdom and holiness .   i m sorry that your tablets are gone  siferra   beenay said .   but maybe there s still a chance the apostles didn t steal them .  that they ll turn up somewhere .    i m not counting on that   said siferra .  and she smiled ruefully and turned away to stare at the darkening sky .  the best she could do by way of comfort was take athor s line  that the world was ending in a little while anyway  and nothing mattered very much .  but that was cold comfort indeed .  she fought inwardly against any such counsel of despair .  the important thing was to keep on thinking of the day after tomorrow of survival  of rebuilding  of the struggle and its fulfillment .  it was no good to fall into despondency like athor  to accept the downfall of humanity  to shrug and give up all hope .  a high tenor voice cut suddenly across her gloomy meditations .   hello  everybody .  hello  hello  hello .    sheerin .   beenay cried .   what are you doing here .   the plump cheeks of the newcomer expanded in a pleased smile .   what s this morgue like atmosphere in here .  no one s losing their nerve  i hope .   athor started in consternation and said peevishly   yes  what are you doing here  sheerin .  i thought you were going to stay behind in the sanctuary .   sheerin laughed and dropped his tubby figure into a chair .   sanctuary be damned .  the place bored me .  i wanted to be here  where things are getting hot .  don t you suppose i have my share of curiosity .  i rode in the tunnel of mystery  after all .  i can survive another dose of darkness .  and i want to see these stars that the apostles have been spouting about .   he rubbed his hands and added in a soberer tone   it s freezing outside .  the wind s enough to hang icicles on your nose .  dovim doesn t seem to give any heat at all  at the distance it is this evening .   the white haired director ground his teeth in sudden exasperation .   why do you go out of your way to do a crazy thing like this  sheerin .  what kind of good can you be  round here .    what kind of good am i around there .   sheerin spread his palms in comical resignation .   a psychologist isn t worth a damn in the sanctuary .  not now .  not a thing i could do for them .  they re all snug and safe  laced in underground  nothing to worry about .    and if a mob should break in during the darkness .   sheerin laughed .   i very much doubt that anyone who didn t know where the entrance was would be able to find the sanctuary in broad daylight  let alone once the suns have gone out .  but if they do  well  they d need men of action to defend them .  me .  i m a hundred pounds too heavy for that .  so why should i huddle in down there with them .  i d rather be here .   siferra felt her own spirits rise as she heard sheerin s words .  she too had chosen to spend the evening of darkness at the observatory  rather than in the sanctuary .  perhaps it was mere wild bravado  perhaps it was idiotic overconfidence  but she was sure that she could last out the hours of the eclipse and even the coming of the stars  if there was anything to that part of the myth and retain her sanity .  and so she had decided not to pass up the experience .  now it appeared that sheerin  no model of bravery  had taken the same approach .  which might mean that he had decided the impact of darkness would not be so overwhelming after all  despite the grim predictions he had been making for months .  she had heard his tales of the tunnel of mystery and the havoc it had wreaked  even on sheerin himself .  yet here he was .  he must have come to believe that people  some at least  would turn out ultimately to be more resilient than he had expected earlier .  or else he was simply being reckless .  perhaps he preferred to lose his mind in one quick burst this evening  siferra thought  rather than stay sane and have to cope with the innumerable and perhaps insuperable problems of the hard times ahead  no .  no .  she was falling into morbid pessimism again .  she brushed the thought away .   sheerin .   it was theremon  coming across the room to greet the psychologist .   you remember me .  theremon     .    of course i do  theremon   sheerin said .  he offered his hand .   gods  fellow  you ve been rough on us lately  haven t you .  but bygones may as well be bygones this evening .    i wish be was a bygone   siferra muttered under her breath .  she scowled in distaste and stepped back a few paces .  theremon shook sheerin s hand .   what s this sanctuary you re supposed to have been in .  i ve heard a little about it here this evening  but i don t have any real idea of what it is .    well   said sheerin   we have managed to convince a few people  at least  of the validity of our prophecy of er doom  to be spectacular about it  and those few have taken proper measures .  they consist mainly of the immediate members of the families of the observatory staff  certain of the faculty of saro university  and a few outsiders .  my companion liliath     is there at this very moment  as a matter of fact  and i suppose i should be too  but for my infernal curiosity .  there are about three hundred people all told .    i see .  they re supposed to hide where the darkness and the er stars can t get at them  and then hold out when the rest of the world goes poof .    exactly .  the apostles have some sort of hideout of their own also  you know .  we aren t sure how many people are in it just a few  if we re lucky  but more likely they ve got thousands stashed away who will come forth and inherit the world after the darkness .    so the university group   theremon said   is intended as a counterforce to that .   sheerin nodded .   if possible .  it won t be easy .  with almost all of mankind insane  with the great cities going up in flames  with perhaps a big horde of apostles imposing their kind of order on what s left of the world no  it ll be tough for them to survive .  but at least they have food  water  shelter  weapons    they ve got more   said athor .   they ve got all our records  except for what we will collect today .  those records will mean everything to the next cycle  and that s what must survive .  the rest can go hang .   theremon whistled a long  low whistle .   you people are completely certain  then  that everything you ve predicted is going to come about just as you say .    what other position could we possibly take .    siferra asked harshly .   once we saw that disaster would inevitably come    yes   the newspaperman said .   you had to make preparations for it .  because you were in possession of the truth .  just as the apostles of flame are in possession of the truth .  i wish i could be half so certain about anything as all you truthpossessors are about this evening .   she glowered at him .   i wish you could be out there this evening  wandering through the burning streets .  but no no  you ll be safe in here .  it s more than you deserve .    easy   sheerin said .  he took theremon by the arm and quietly he said   no sense provoking people now  friend .  let s go somewhere where we won t bother people  and we can talk .    good idea   theremon said .  but he made no motion toward leaving the room .  a game of stochastic chess had begun around the table  and theremon stood watching for a moment or two in obvious incomprehension as moves were made rapidly and in silence .  he seemed amazed by the ability of the players to concentrate on a game  when they all must believe that the end of the world was just hours away .   come   sheerin said again .   yes .  yes   said theremon .  he and sheerin went out into the hail  followed  an instant later  by beenay .  what an infuriating man  siferra thought .  she stared at the bright orb of dovim  burning fiercely in the sky .  had the sky grown even darker in the past few minutes .  no  no  she told herself  that was impossible .  dovim was still there .  it was just imagination .  the sky looked strange  now that dovim was the only sun aloft .  she had never seen it like that before  such a deep purple hue .  but it was far from dark out there  somber  yes  but there was light enough  and everything was still easily visible outside despite the relative dimness of the one small sun .  she thought about her lost tablets again .  then she banished them from her mind .  the chess players had the right idea  she told herself .  sit down and relax .  if you can .   sheerin led the way to the next room .  there were softer chairs in there .  and thick red curtains on the windows  and a maroon carpet on the floor .  with the strange brick toned light of dovim pouring in  the general effect was one of dried blood everywhere .  he had been surprised to see theremon at the observatory this evening  after the horrendous columns he had written  after all he had done to pour cold water on athor s campaign for national preparedness .  in recent weeks athor had gone almost berserk with rage every time theremon s name was mentioned  yet somehow he had relented and permitted him to be here for the eclipse .  that was odd and a little troublesome .  it might mean that the stern fabric of the old astronomer s personality had begun to break down that not only his anger but also his whole inner structure of character was giving way in the face of the oncoming catastrophe .  for that matter sheerin was more than slightly surprised to find himself at the observatory too .  it had been a last minute decision  a pure impulse of the kind he rarely experienced .  liliath had been horrified .  he was pretty horrified himself .  he had not forgotten the terrors that his few minutes in the tunnel of mystery had evoked in him .  but he had realized  in the end  that he bad to be here  just as he had had to take that ride in the tunnel .  to everyone else  he might be nothing more than an easygoing overweight academic hack  but to himself he was still a scientist beneath all the blubber .  the study of darkness had concerned him through all his professional career .  how  then  could he ever live with himself afterward  knowing that during the most celebrated episode of darkness in more than two thousand years he had chosen to hide himself away in the cozy safety of an underground chamber .  no  he had to be here .  witnessing the eclipse .  feeling the darkness take possession of the world .  theremon said with unexpected frankness  as they entered the adjoining room   i m starting to wonder whether i was right to have been such a skeptic  sheerin .    you ought to wonder about it .    well  i am .  seeing just dovim up there like that .  that weird red color spreading over everything .  you know  i d give ten credits for a decent dose of white light right now .  a good stiff tano special .  for that matter  i d like to see tano and sitha in the sky too .  or  even better  onos .    onos will be there in the morning   put in beenay  who had just entered the room .   yes  but will we .   asked sheerin .  and grinned immediately to take the sting from his words .  to beenay he said   our journalistic friend is eager for a little nip of alcohol .    athor will have a fit .  he s given orders for everybody to be sober here this evening .   sheerin said   so there s nothing but water to be had .    well    come on  beenay .  athor won t come in here .    i suppose .   tiptoeing to the nearest window  beenay squatted  and from the low window box beneath it withdrew a bottle of red liquid that gurgled suggestively when he shook it .   i thought athor didn t know about this   he remarked  as he trotted back to the table .   here .  we ve only got one glass  so as the guest you can have it  theremon .  sheerin and i can drink from the bottle .   and he filled the tiny cup with judicious care .  laughing  theremon said   you never touched alcohol at all when we first met  beenay .    that was then .  this is now .  tense times  theremon .  i m learning .  a good drink can be very relaxing at times like these .    so i ve heard   theremon said lightly .  he took a sip .  it was some sort of red wine  rough and raw  probably cheap jug wine from one of the southern provinces .  just the sort of thing that a lifelong abstainer like beenay would tend to buy  not knowing any better .  but it was better than nothing .  beenay helped himself to a hearty gulp and passed the bottle to sheerin .  the psychologist up ended it and held it to his lips for a long slow drink .  then  putting it down with a satisfied grunt and a smack of his lips  he said to beenay   athor seems strange this evening .  i mean  even allowing for the special circumstances .  what s wrong .    worrying about faro and yimot  i suppose .    who .    a couple of young graduate students .  they were due several hours ago and haven t shown up yet .  athor s terrifically shorthanded  of course  because all but the really essential people have gone to the sanctuary .   theremon said   you don t think they deserted  do you .    who .  faro and yimot .  of course not .  they re not the type .  they d give everything to be here this evening taking measurements when the eclipse happens .  but what if there s some kind of riot going on in saro city and they ve been caught in it .   beenay shrugged .   well  they ll show up sooner or later  i imagine .  but if they re not here as we approach the critical phase  things could get a little sticky when the work piles up .  that must be what athor s worrying about .   sheerin said   i m not so sure .  two missing men would be on his mind  yes .  but there s something else .  he looks so old  suddenly .  weary .  defeated  even .  the last time i saw him he was full of fight  full of talk about the reconstruction of society after the eclipse the real athor  the iron man .  now all i see is a sad  tired  pathetic old wreck who s simply waiting for the end to come .  the fact that he didn t even bother to throw theremon out    he tried   theremon said .   beenay talked him out of it .  and siferra .    there you are .  beenay  did you ever know anyone who was able to talk athor out of anything .   here  pass me the wine .    it may be my fault   theremon said .   everything that i wrote  attacking his plan to set up sanctuary type shelters all across the country .  if he genuinely believes that there s going to be a worldwide darkness in a few hours and that all mankind will go violently insane    which he does   said beenay .   as do all of us .    then the failure of the government to take athor s predictions seriously must be an overwhelming  crushing defeat for him .  and i m responsible as much as anyone .  if it turns out that you people were right  i ll never forgive myself .   sheerin said   don t flatter yourself  theremon .  even if you had writted five columns a day calling for a colossal preparedness movement  the government still wouldn t have done anything .  it might have taken athor s warnings even less seriously than it did if that s possible  with a popular crusading journalist like you on athor s side .    thanks   theremon said .   i really appreciate that .  is there any wine left .   he looked toward beenay .   and of course i m in trouble with siferra too .  she thinks i m too contemptible for words .    there was a time when she seemed really interested in you   beenay said .   i was wondering about it for a while  as a matter of fact .  whether you and she were ah    no   theremon said  grinning .   not quite .  and we never will  now .  but we were very good friends for a while .  a fascinating  fascinating woman .  what about this cyclic theory of prehistory of hers .  is there anything to it .    not if you listen to some of the other people in her department   sheerin said .   they re really scornful of it .  of course  they ve all got a vested interest in the established archaeological framework  which says that beklimot was the first urban center and that if you go back more than a couple of thousand years you can t find any civilization at all  just primitive shaggy jungle dwelling folk .    but how can they argue away these recurrent catastrophes at the hill of thombo .   theremon asked .   scientists who think they know the real story can argue away anything that threatens their beliefs   sheerin said .   you scratch an entrenched academic and you ll find he s pretty similar in some ways to an apostle of flame  underneath .  it s just a different kind of robe they wear .   he took the bottle  which theremon had been idly holding  and helped himself again .   the deuce with them .  even a layman like me can see that siferra s discoveries at thombo turn our picture of prehistory inside out .  the question isn t whether there were recurrent fires over a period of all those thousands of years .  it s why .   theremon said   i ve seen plenty of explanations lately  all of them more or less fantastic .  someone from kitro university was arguing that there are periodic rains of fire every few thousand years .  and we got a letter at the newspaper from someone who claims to be a free lance astronomer and says he s  proved  that kalgash passes through one of the suns every so often .  i think there were even wilder things proposed .    there s only one idea that makes any sense   beenay said quietly .   remember the concept of the sword of thargola .  you have to dispense with the hypotheses that require extra bells and whistles in order to make sense .  there s no reason why a rain of fire should fall on us every now and then  and it s obvious nonsense to talk about passing through suns .  but the eclipse theory is accounted for perfectly by mathematical consideration of the orbit of kalgash as it s affected by universal gravitation .    the eclipse theory may stand up  yes .  no doubt it does .  we ll find out pretty soon  eh .   theremon said .   but apply thargola s sword yourself to what you ve just said .  there s nothing in the eclipse theory that tells us that there ll necessarily be tremendous fires immediately afterward .    no   sheerin said .   there s nothing about that in the theory .  but common sense indicates it .  the eclipse will bring darkness .  darkness will bring madness .  and madness will bring the flames .  which wrecks another couple of millenniums of painful struggle .  it all comes to nothing tomorrow .  tomorrow there won t be a city standing unharmed in all kalgash .    you sound just like the apostles   theremon said angrily .   i heard pretty much the same stuff from folimun    months ago .  and told you two about it  i recall  at the six suns club .   he gazed out the window  past the wooded slopes of observatory mount to where the spires of saro city gleamed bloodily on the horizon .  the newsman felt the tension of uncertainty grow within him as he cast a quick glance at dovim .  it glowered redly at zenith  dwarfed and evil .  doggedly theremon went on   i can t buy your chain of reasoning .  why should i go nuts just because there isn t a sun in the sky .  and even if i do yes  i haven t forgotten those poor bastards in the tunnel of mystery even if i do  and everyone else does  how does that harm the cities .  are we going to blow them down .    i said the same thing at first   beenay put in .   before i stopped to think things through .  if you were in darkness  what would you want more than anything else what would it be that every instinct would call for .    why  light  i suppose .    yes .   sheerin cried  shouting now .   light  yes .  light .    so .    and how would you get light .   theremon pointed to the switch on the wall .   i d turn it on .    right   said sheerin mockingly .   and the gods in their infinite kindness would provide enough current to give you what you wanted .  because the power company certainly wouldn t be able to .  not with all the generators grinding to a halt  and the people who operate them stumbling around babbling in the dark  and the same with the transmission line controllers .  you follow me .   theremon nodded numbly .  sheerin said   where will light come from  when the generators stop .  the godlights  i suppose .  they ve all got batteries .  but you may not have a godlight handy .  you ll be out there on the street in the darkness  and your godlight will be sitting at home  right next to your bed .  and you want light .  so you burn something  eh  mr .  theremon .  ever see a forest fire .  ever go camping and cook a stew over a wood fire .  heat isn t the only thing burning wood gives off  you know .  it gives off light  and people are very well aware of that .  and when it s dark they want light  and they re going to get it .    so they ll burn logs   theremon said without much conviction .   they ll burn whatever they can get .  they ve got to have light .  they ve got to burn something  and wood won t be handy  not on city streets .  so they ll burn whatever is nearest .  a pile of newspapers .  why not .  the saro city chronicle will give a little brightness for a while .  what about the newsstands that the papers on sale are stacked up in .  burn them too .  burn clothing .  burn books .  burn roof shingles .  burn anything .  the people will have their light and every center of habitation goes up in flames .  there are your fires  mr .  newspaperman .  there is the end of the world you used to live in .    if the eclipse comes   said theremon  an undertone of stubbornness in his voice .   if  yes   said sheerin .   i m no astronomer .  and no apostle  either .  but my money s on the eclipse .   he looked straight at theremon .  eyes held each other as though the whole matter were a personal affair of respective will powers  and then theremon broke away  wordlessly .  his breathing was harsh and ragged .  he put his hands to his forehead and pressed hard .  then came a sudden hubbub from the adjoining room .  beenay said   i think i heard yimot s voice .  he and faro must have showed up  finally .  let s go in and see what kept them .    might as well .   muttered theremon .  he drew a long breath and seemed to shake himself .  the tension was broken for the moment .   the main room was in an uproar .  everyone clustered around faro and yimot  who were trying to parry a burst of eager questions while they removed their outer garments .  athor bustles through the crowd and faced the newcomers angrily .   do you realize that it s practically e hour .  where have you two been .   faro    seated himself and rubbed his hands .  his round  fleshy cheeks were red with the outdoor chill .  he was smirking strangely .  and he seemed curiously calm  almost as if he had been drugged .   i ve never seen him like that before   beenay whispered to sheerin .   he s always been very obsequious  very much the humble junior astronomer deferring to the great people around him .  even to me .  but now    shh .  listen   sheerin said .  faro said   yimot and i have just finished carrying through a little crazy experiment of our own .  we ve been trying to see if we couldn t construct an arrangement by which we could simulate the appearance of darkness and stars so as to get an advance notion as to how it looked .   there was a confused murmur from the listeners .   stars .   theremon said .   you know what stars are .  how did you find out .   smirking again  faro said   by reading the book of revelations .  it seems pretty clear that stars are something very bright  like suns but smaller  that appear in the sky when kalgash enters the cave of darkness .    absurd .   someone said .   impossible .    the book of revelations .  that s where they did their research .  can you imagine    quiet   athor said .  there was a sudden look of interest in his eyes  a touch of his old vigor .   go on  faro .  what was this  arrangement  of yours .  how did you go about it .    well   said faro   the idea came to yimot and me a couple of months ago  and we ve been working it out in our spare time .  yimot knew of a low one story house down in the city with a domed roof some kind of warehouse  i think .  anyway  we bought it    with what .   interrupted athor peremptorily .   where did you get the money .    our bank accounts   grunted the lanky  pipestem limbed yimot    .   it cost us two thousand credits .   then  defensively   well  what of it .  tomorrow two thousand credits will be two thousand pieces of paper and nothing else .    sure   faro said .   so we bought the place and rigged it up with black velvet from top to bottom so as to get as perfect a darkness as possible .  then we punched tiny holes in the ceiling and through the roof and covered them with little metal caps  all of which could be shoved aside simultaneously at the close of a switch .  at least  we didn t do that part ourselves  we got a carpenter and an electrician and some others money didn t count .  the point was that we could get the light to shine through those holes in the roof  so that we could get a starlike effect .    what we imagined a starlike effect would be   yimot amended .  not a breath was drawn during the pause that followed .  athor said stiffly   you had no right to make a private   faro seemed abashed .   i know  sir but  frankly  yimot and i thought the experiment was a little dangerous .  if the effect really worked  we half expected to go mad from what dr .  sheerin says about all this  we thought that would be rather likely .  we felt that we alone should take the risk .  of course  if we found that we could retain our sanity  it occurred to us that we might be able to develop immunity to the real thing  and then expose the rest of you to what we had experienced .  but things didn t work out at all    why .  what happened .   it was yimot who answered .   we shut ourselves in and allowed our eyes to get accustomed to the dark .  it s an extremely creepy feeling because the total darkness makes you feel as if the walls and ceiling are crashing in on you .  but we got over that and pulled the switch .  the caps fell away and the roof glittered all over with little dots of light .    and .    and nothing .  that was the wacky part of it .  so far as we understood the book of revelations  we were experiencing the effect of seeing stars against a background of darkness .  but nothing happened .  it was just a roof with holes in it  and bright points of light coming through  and that s just what it looked like .  we tried it over and over again that s what kept us so late but there just wasn t any effect at all .   there was a shocked silence .  all eyes turned to sheerin  who stood motionless  mouth open .  theremon was the first to speak .   you know what this does to the whole theory you ve built up  sheerin  don t you .   he was grinning with relief .  but sheerin raised his hand .   not so fast  theremon .  just let me think this through .  these so called  stars  that the boys constructed the total time of their exposure to darkness   he fell silent .  everyone watched him .  and then he snapped his fingers  and when he lifted his head there was neither surprise nor uncertainty in his eyes .   of course   he never finished .  thilanda  who had been up in the observatory dome exposing photographic plates of the sky at ten second intervals as the time of eclipse drew near  came rushing in  waving her arms in wild circles that would have been worthy of yimot at his most excited .   dr .  athor .  dr .  athor .   athor turned .   what is it .    we just found he came walking right into the dome you won t believe this  dr .  athor    slow down  child .  what happened .  who came walking in .   there were the sounds of a scuffle in the hail  and a sharp clang .  beenay  starting to his feet  rushed out the door and came to a sudden halt  crying   what the deuce .   davnit and hikkinan  who should have been up in the dome with thilanda  were out there .  the two astronomers were struggling with a third figure  a lithe  athletic looking man in his late thirties  with strange curling red hair  a thin sharp featured face  icy blue eyes .  they dragged him into the room and stood holding him with his arms gripped tightly behind his back .  the stranger wore the dark robe of the apostles of flame .   folimun    .   athor cried .  and in the same breath  from theremon   folimun .  what in the name of darkness are you doing here .   quietly  in a cold  commanding tone  the apostle said   it s not in the name of darkness that i ve come to you this evening but in the name of light .   athor stared at thilanda .   where did you find this man .    i told you  dr .  athor .  we were busy with the plates  and then we heard him .  he had come right in and was standing behind us .   where is athor   he said .   i must see athor .     call the security guards   athor said  his face darkening with rage .   the observatory is supposed to be sealed this evening .  i want to know how this man succeeded in getting past the guards .    obviously you ve got an apostle or two on the payroll   theremon said pleasantly .   naturally they d have been only too obliging when the apostle folimun showed up and asked them to unlock the gate .   athor shot him a blistering glance .  but the look on his face indicated that the old astronomer realized the probable accuracy of theremon s guess .  everyone in the room had formed a ring around folimun now .  they were all staring at him in astonishment siferra  theremon  beenay  athor  and the rest .  calmly folimun said   i am folimun     special adjutant to his serenity mondior    .  i have come this evening not as a criminal  as you seem to think  but as an envoy from his serenity .  do you think you could persuade these two zealots of yours to release me  athor .   athor gestured irritatedly .   let him go .    thank you   folimun said .  he rubbed his arms and adjusted the set of his robe .  then he bowed in gratitude or was it only mock gratitude .  to athor .  the air around the apostle seemed to tingle with some special electricity .   now then   athor said .   what are you doing here .  what do you want .    nothing  i suspect  that you would give me of your own free will .    you re probably right about that .   folimun said   when you and i met some months ago  athor  it was  i would say  a very tense meeting  a meeting of two men who might well have looked upon themselves as princes of hostile realms .  to you  i was a dangerous fanatic .  to me  you were the leader of a band of godless sinners .  and yet we were able to come to a certain area of agreement  which was  you recall  that on the evening of theptar nineteenth  darkness would fall upon kalgash and would remain for many hours .   athor scowled .   come to the point  if there is one  folimun .  darkness is about to fall  and we don t have a lot more time .   folimun replied   to me  the coming darkness was being sent upon us by the will of the gods .  to you  it represented nothing more than the soulless movement of astronomical bodies .  very well  we agreed to disagree .  i provided you with certain data that had been in the possession of the apostles since the previous year of godliness  certain tables of the movements of the suns in the sky  and other even more abstruse data .  in return  you promised to prove the essential truth of the creed of our faith and to make that proof known to the people of kalgash .   looking at his watch  athor said   and i did exactly that .  what does your master want of me now .  i ve fulfilled my end of the bargain .   folimun smiled faintly  but said nothing .  there was an uneasy stir in the room .   i asked him for astronomical data  yes   athor said  looking around .   data that only the apostles had .  and it was given to me .  for that  thank you .  in return i did agree  in a manner of speaking  to make public my mathematical confirmation of the apostles  basic tenet that darkness would descend on theptar nineteenth .    there was no real need for us to give you anything   was the proud retort .   our basic tenet  as you call it  was not in need of proof .  it stands proven by the book of revelations .    for the handful that constitute your cult  yes   athor snapped .   don t pretend to mistake my meaning .  i offered to present scientific background for your beliefs .  and i did .   the cultist s eyes narrowed bitterly .   yes  you did with a fox s subtlety  for your pretended explanation backed our beliefs and at the same time removed all necessity for them .  you made of the darkness and of the stars a natural phenomenon and removed all their real significance .  that was blasphemy .    if so  the fault isn t mine .  the facts exist .  what can i do but state them .    your  facts  are a fraud and a delusion .   athor s face grew mottled with rage .   how do you know .   and the answer came with the certainty of absolute faith   i know .   the director purpled even more .  beenay started to go to his side  but athor waved him away .   and what does mondior    want us to do .  he still thinks  i suppose  that in trying to warn the world to take measures against the menace of madness we are somehow interfering with his attempt to seize power after the eclipse .  well  we aren t succeeding .  i hope that makes him happy .    the attempt itself has done harm enough .  and what you are trying to achieve here this evening will make things worse .        delete this   what do you know of what we re trying to achieve here this evening .   athor demanded .  smoothly folimun said   we know that you ve never abandoned your hope of influencing the populace .  having failed to do it before the darkness and the flames  you intend to come forth afterward  equipped with photographs of the transition from daylight to darkness .  you mean to offer a rational explanation to the survivors of what happened and to put aside in a safe place your supposed evidence of your beliefs  so that at the end of the next year of godliness your successors in the realm of science will be able to step forward and guide humanity in such a way that the darkness can be resisted .    someone s been saying things   beenay whispered .  folimun went on   all this works against the interests of mondior     obviously .  and it is mondior    who is the appointed prophet of the gods  the one who is intended to lead mankind through the period ahead .    it s high time you came to the point   athor said in a frigid tone .  folimun nodded .   the point is simply this .  your ill advised and blasphemous attempt to gain information by means of your devilish instruments must be stopped .  i only regret that i could not have destroyed your infernal devices with my own hands .    is that what you had in mind .  it wouldn t have done you much good .  all our data  except for the direct evidence we intend collecting right now  is already safely cached and well beyond the possibility of harm .    bring it forth .  destroy it .    what .    destroy all your work .  destroy your instruments .  in return for which  i will see to it that you and all your people are protected against the chaos that is certain to break loose when nightfall comes .   now there was laughter in the room .   crazy   someone said .   absolutely nuts .    not at all   folimun said .   devout  yes .  dedicated to a cause beyond your comprehension  yes .  but not crazy .  i m quite sane  i assure you .  i think this man here  he indicated theremon  would testify to that  and he s not known for his gullibility .  but i place my cause above all other things .  this night is crucial in the history of the world  and when tomorrow dawns  godliness must triumph .  i offer you an ultimatum .  you people are to end your blasphemous attempt to provide rational explanations for the coming of darkness this evening and accept his serenity mondior    as the true voice of the gods  will .  when morning comes  you will go forth to do mondior s work among mankind  and no more will be heard of eclipses  or orbits  or the law of universal gravitation  or the rest of your foolishness .    and if we refuse .   said athor  looking almost amused by folimun s presumptuousness .   then   said folimun coolly   a band of angry people led by the apostles of flame will ascend this hill and destroy your observatory and everything within it .    enough   athor said .   call security .  have this man thrown out of here .    you have exactly one hour   folimun said  unperturbed .   and then the army of holiness will attack .    he s bluffing   sheerin said suddenly .  athor  as though he hadn t heard  said again   call security .  i want him out of here .    damn it  athor  what s wrong with you .   sheerin cried .   if you turn him loose  he ll get out there to fan the flames .  don t you see  chaos is what all these apostles have been living for .  and this man s a master at creating it .    what are you suggesting .    lock him up   sheerin said .   stash him away in a closet and slap a padlock on him  and keep him there for the duration of the time of darkness .  it s the worst possible thing we could do to him .  if he s locked away like that  he won t see the darkness  and he won t see the stars .  it doesn t take much of a knowledge of the fundamental creed of the apostles to realize that for him to be hidden from the stars when they appear will mean the loss of his immortal soul .  lock him up  athor .  it s not only what s safest for us  it s what he deserves .    and afterward   breathed folimun fiercely   when you have all lost your minds  there ll be no one to let me out .  this is a sentence of death .  i know as well as you do what the coming of the stars will mean i know it far better than you .  with your minds gone  you won t give any thought to freeing me .  suffocation or slow starvation  is it .  about what i might have expected from a group of of scientists .   he made the word sound obscene .   but it won t work .  i ve taken the precaution of letting my followers know that they are to attack the observatory precisely an hour from now  unless i appear and order them not to .  locking me away  then  will achieve nothing useful to you .  within an hour it ll bring your own destruction upon you  that s all .  and then my people will free me  and together joyously  ecstatically we will watch the coming of the stars .   a vein throbbed in folimun s temple .   then  tomorrow  when you all are babbling madmen  damned forever by your deeds  we will set about the creation of a wondrous new world .   sheerin glanced doubtfully at athor .  but athor looked hesitant too .  beenay  standing next to theremon  murmured   what do you think .  is he bluffing .   but the newspaperman didn t reply .  he had gone pale to the lips .   look at that .   the finger he pointed toward the window was shaking  and his voice was dry and cracked .  there was a simultaneous gasp as every eye followed the pointing finger and  for one moment  stared frozenly .  dovim was chipped on one side .   the tiny bit of encroaching blackness was perhaps the width of a fingernail  but to the staring watchers it magnified itself into the crack of doom .  for theremon the sight of that small arc of darkness struck with terrible force .  he winced and put his hand to his forehead and turned away from the window .  he was shaken to the roots of his soul by that little chip in dovim s side .  theremon the skeptic theremon the mocker theremon the tough minded analyst of other people s folly  gods .  how wrong i was .  as he turned  his eyes met siferra s .  she was at the other side of the room  looking at him .  there was contempt in her eyes  or was it pity .  he forced himself to meet her gaze and shook his head sadly  as though to tell her with all the humility there was in him  i fouled things up and i m sorry .  i m sorry .  i m sorry .  it seemed to him that she smiled .  maybe she had understood what he was trying to say .  then the room dissolved in shrieking confusion for a moment  as everyone began to rush frenziedly around  and a moment after that  the confusion gave way to an orderly scurry of activity as the astronomers leaped to their assigned tasks  some running upstairs to the observatory dome to watch the eclipse through the telescopes  some going to the computers  some using hand held instruments to record the changes in dovim s disk .  at this crucial moment there was no time for emotion .  they were merely scientists with work to do .  theremon  alone in the midst of it all  looked about for beenay and found him  finally  sitting at a keyboard  madly working out some sort of problem .  of athor there was no sign at all .  sheerin appeared at theremon s side and said prosaically   first contact must have been made five or ten minutes ago .  a little early  but i suppose there were plenty of uncertainties involved in the calculations despite all the effort that went into them .   he smiled .    you ought to get away from that window  man .    why is that .   said theremon  who had swung around again to stare at dovim .   athor is furious   the psychologist whispered .   he missed first contact on account of this fuss with folimun .  you re in a vulnerable position  standing where you are .  if athor comes by this way he s likely to try to throw you out the window .   theremon nodded shortly and sat down .  sheerin looked at him  eyes wide with surprise .   the devil  man .  you re shaking .    eh .   theremon licked dry lips and then tried to smile .   i don t feel very well  and that s a fact .   the psychologist s eyes hardened .   you re not losing your nerve  are you .    no .   cried theremon in a flash of indignation .   give me a chance  will you .  you know  sheerin  i wanted to believe all this eclipse rigmarole  but i couldn t  i honestly couldn t  it all seemed like the sheerest woolly fantasy to me .  i wanted to believe it for beenay s sake  for siferra s sake even for athor s sake  in a strange way .  but i couldn t .  not until just this minute .  give me a chance to get used to the idea  all right .  you ve had months .  it s all hitting me at once .    i see what you mean   sheerin said thoughtfully .   listen .  have you got a family parents  wife  children .   theremon shook his head .   no .  nobody i need to worry about .  well  i have a sister  but she s two thousand miles away .  i haven t even spoken with her in a couple of years .    well then  what about yourself .    what do you mean .    you could try to get to our sanctuary .  they d have room for you there .  there s probably still time i could call them and say that you re on the way  and they d unlock the gate for you    so you think i m scared stiff  do you .    you said yourself you didn t feel so good .    maybe i don t .  but i m here to cover the story .  that s what i intend to do .   there was a faint smile on the psychologist s face .   i see .  professional honor  is that it .    you might call it that .   wearily theremon said   besides  i helped in a big way to undermine athor s preparedness program  or have you forgotten .  do you really think i d have the gall now to go running for shelter into the very sanctuary i was poking fun at  sheerin .    i hadn t seen it that way .    i wonder if there s any more of that miserable wine hidden around here somewhere .  if ever there was a time when a fellow needed a drink    shh .   sheerin said .  he nudged theremon violently .   do you hear that .  listen .   theremon glanced in the direction sheerin was indicating .  folimun    stood by the window  a look of wild elation on his face .  the apostle was droning something to himself in a low singsong tone .  it made the newspaperman s skin crawl .   what s he saying .   he whispered .   can you make it out .    he s quoting the book of revelations  fifth chapter   replied sheerin .  then  urgently   keep quiet and listen  will you .   the apostle s voice rose suddenly in an increase of fervor    and it came to pass in those days that the sun  dovim  held lone vigil in the sky for ever longer periods as the revolutions passed  until such time as for full half a revolution  it alone  shrunken and cold  shone down upon kalgash .    and men did assemble in the public squares and in the highways  there to debate and to marvel at the sight  for a strange fear and misery bad seized their spirits .  their minds were troubled and their speech confused  for the souls of men awaited the coming of the stars .    and in the city of trigon  at high noon  vendret   came forth and said unto the men of trigon   lo  ye sinners .  though ye scorn the ways of righteousness  yet will the time of reckoning come .  even now the cave approaches to swallow kalgash  yea  and all it contains .     and in that moment as he spoke the lip of the cave of darkness passed the edge of dovim so that to all kalgash it was hidden from sight .  loud were the cries and lamentations of men as it vanished  and great the fear of soul with which they were afflicted .    and then it came to pass that the darkness of the cave fell full upon kalgash in all its terrible weight  so that there was no light to be seen anywhere on all the surface of the world .  men were even as blinded  nor could one see his neighbor  though be felt his breath upon his face .    and in this blackness there appeared the stars in countless number  and their brightness was as the brightness of all the gods in concourse assembled .  and with the coming of the stars there came also a music  which had a beauty so wondrous that the very leaves of the trees turned to tongues that cried out in wonder .    and in that moment the souls of men departed from them and fled upward to the stars  and their abandoned bodies became even as beasts  yea  even as dull brutes of the wild  so that through the darkened streets of the cities of kalgash they prowled with wild cries  like the cries of beasts .    from the stars then there reached down the heavenly flames  that was the bearer of the will of the gods  and where the flames touched  the cities of kalgash were consumed even to utter destruction  so that of man and of the works of man  nothing whatever remained .    even then   there was a subtle change in folimun s tone .  his eyes had not shifted  but somehow it seemed that he had become aware of the absorbed attention of the other two .  easily  without pausing for breath  he altered the timbre of his voice  so that it rose in pitch and the syllables became more liquid .  theremon  caught by surprise  frowned .  the words seemed to be on the border of familiarity .  there had been nothing more than an elusive shift in the accent  a tiny change in the vowel stress yet theremon no longer had the slightest idea of what folimun was saying .   maybe siferra would be able to understand him now   sheerin said  he s probably speaking the liturgical tongue now  the old language of the previous year of godliness that the book of revelations was supposedly translated from  theremon gave the psychologist a peculiar look  you know a lot about this  don t you .  what s he saying  then .    you think i can tell you .  i ve done a little studying lately  yes but not that much i m just guessing at what he s talking about  weren t we going to lock him in a closet .    let him be   theremon said  what difference does it make now .  it s his big moment let him enjoy it  he shoved his chair back and ran his fingers through his hair his hands weren t shaking any longer .   funny thing   he said .   now that it s all actually begun  i don t feel jittery any more .    no .    why should p  theremon said a note of hectic gaiety had crept into his voice  there s nothing i can do to stop what s going to happen  is there .  so i ll just try to ride it out  do you think the stars are really going to appear .    not a clue   sheerin said .   maybe beenay would know .    or athor .    leave athor alone   said the psychologist  laughing .   he just passed through the room and gave you a look that should have killed you .   theremon made a wry face  i ll have plenty of crow to eat when all this is over  i know .  what do you think  sheerin .  is it safe to watch the show outside .    when the darkness is total    i don t mean the darkness i can handle darkness  i think i mean the stars .    the stars .   sheerin repeated impatiently .   i told you  i don t know anything about them .    they re probably not as terrifying as the book of revelations would want us to think .  if that pinpoint in the ceiling experiment of those two students means anything   he turned his hands palms upward  as though they might hold the answer .   tell me  sheerin  what do you think .  won t some people be immune to the effects of the darkness and the stars .   sheerin shrugged .  he pointed to the floor in front of them .  dovim was past its zenith now  and the square of bloody sunlight that outlined the window upon the floor had moved a few feet toward the center of the room  where it lay like the terrible stain of some ghastly crime .  theremon stared at its dusky color thoughtfully .  then he swung around and squinted once more into the sun itself .  the chip in its side had grown to a black encroachment that covered a third of its visible disk .  theremon shuddered .  once  jokingly  he had talked with beenay of dragons in the sky .  now it seemed to him that the dragon had come  that it had swallowed five of the suns already  that it was nibbling enthusiastically at the only one that remained .  sheerin said   there are probably two million people in saro city who are all trying to join the apostles at once .  they ll be holding one giant revival meeting down at mondior s headquarters  i ll bet .   do i think there s immunity to the darkness effects .  well  we re about to discover if there is  aren t we .    there must be .  how else would the apostles keep the book of revelations going from cycle to cycle  and how on kalgash did it get written in the first place .  there must have been some sort of immunity .  if everyone had gone mad  who would have been left to write the book .    very likely the members of the secret cult hid themselves away in sanctuaries until it was over  just as some of us are doing tonight   sheerin said .   not good enough .  the book of revelations is set up as an eyewitness account .  that seems to indicate they had firsthand experience of the madness and survived it .    well   said the psychologist   there are three kinds of people who might remain relatively unaffected .  first  the very few who don t get to see the stars at all the blind  let s say  or those who drink themselves into a stupor at the beginning of the eclipse and stay that way to the end .    they don t count .  they re not really witnesses .    i suppose not .  the second group  though young children  to whom the world as a whole is too new and strange for anything to seem more unusual than anything else .  they wouldn t be frightened by the darkness or even the stars  i suspect .  those would just be two more curious events in an endlessly surprising world .  you see that  don t you .   theremon nodded doubtfully .   i suppose so .    lastly  there are those whose minds are too coarse grained to be entirely toppled .  the very insensitive might scarcely be affected the real clods .  they d just shrug and wait for onos to rise  i suppose .    so the book of revelations was written by insensitive clods .   theremon asked  grinning .   hardly .  it would have been written by some of the keenest minds of the new cycle and it would have been based on the fugitive memories of the children  combined with the confused  incoherent babblings of the half mad morons  and  yes  perhaps some of the tales that the clods told .    you d better not let folimun hear that .    of course  the text would have been extensively edited and re edited over the years .  and even passed on  perhaps  from cycle to cycle  the way athor and his people hope to pass along the secret of gravitation .  but my essential point is this  that it can t help but be a mass of distortion  even if it is based on fact .  for instance  consider that experiment with the holes in the roof that faro and yimot were telling us about the one that didn t work .    what of it .    well  the reason why it didn t w   sheerin stopped and rose in alarm .   uh oh .    something wrong .   theremon asked .   athor s coming this way .  just look at his face .   theremon turned .  the old astronomer was moving toward them like some vengeful spirit out of a medieval myth .  his skin was paper white  his eyes were blazing  his features were a twisted mask of consternation .  he shot a venomous glance toward folimun  who still stood by himself in the corner on the far side of the window  and another at theremon .  to sheerin he said   i ve been on the communicator for the past fifteen minutes .  i talked to the sanctuary  and to the security people  and to downtown saro city .    and .    the newspaperman here will be very pleased with his work .  the city s a shambles  i hear .  rioters everywhere  looters  panicky mobs    what about the sanctuary .   sheerin asked anxiously .   safe .  they re sealed off according to plan  and they re going to stay hidden until daybreak  at the earliest .  they ll be all right .  but the city  sheerin you have no idea   he was having difficulty in speaking .  theremon said   sir  if you would only believe me when i tell you how deeply i regret    there s no time for that now   snapped sheerin impatiently .  he put his hand on athor s arm .   what about you .  are you all right  dr .  athor .    does it matter .   athor leaned toward the window  as if trying to see the riots from there .  in a dull voice he said   the moment the eclipse began  everyone out there realized that all the rest of it was going to happen just as we had said we  and the apostles .  and hysteria set in .  the fires will be starting soon .  and i suppose folimun s mob will be here too .  what are we to do  sheerin .  give me some suggestion .   sheerin s head bent  and he stared in long abstraction at his toes .  he tapped his chin with one knuckle for a time .  then he looked up and said crisply   do .  what is there to do .  lock the gates  hope for the best .    what if we were to tell them that we d kill folimun if they tried to break in .    and would you .   sheerin asked .  athor s eyes sparked in surprise .   why i suppose    no   sheerin said .   you wouldn t .    but if we threatened to    no .  no .  they re fanatics  athor .  they already know we re holding him hostage .  they probably expect us to kill him the moment they storm the observatory  and that doesn t faze them at all .  and you know you wouldn t do it anyway .    of course not .    so  then .  how long is it until totality .    not quite an hour .    we ll have to take our chances .  it ll take time for the apostles to get their mob together it s not going to be a bunch of apostles  i ll bet on that  it s going to be a huge mass of ordinary townspeople stirred up to panic by a handful of apostles  who ll promise them immediate entrance into grace  promise them salvation  promise them anything and it ll take more time to get them out here .  observatory mount is a good five miles from the city   sheerin glared out the window .  theremon  beside him  looked also  staring down the slopes .  below  the farmed patches gave way to clumps of white houses in the suburbs .  the metropolis beyond was a blur in the distance a mist in the waning blaze of dovim .  eerie nightmare light bathed the landscape .  without turning  sheerin said   yes  it ll take time for them to get here .  keep the doors locked  keep on working  pray that totality comes first .  once the stars are shining i think not even the apostles will be able to keep that mob s mind on the job of breaking in here .   dovim was cut in half .  the line of division was pushing a slight concavity across the middle into the still bright portion of the red sun .  it was like a gigantic eyelid inexorably dropping down over the light of a world .  theremon stood frozen  staring .  the faint clatter of the room behind him faded into oblivion  and he sensed only the thick silence of the fields outside .  the very insects seemed frightened mute .  and things were dimmer and dimmer .  that weird blood hue stained everything .   don t look so long at a time   sheerin murmured in his ear .   at the sun  you mean .    at the city .  at the sky .  i m not worried about you hurting your eyes .  it s your mind  theremon .    my mind s all right .    you want it to stay that way .  how are you feeling .    why   theremon narrowed his eyes .  his throat was a little dry .  he ran his finger along the inside of his collar .  tight .  tight .  a hand beginning to close around his throat  was that how it felt .  he twisted his neck back and forth but found no relief .   a little trouble breathing  maybe .    difficulty in breathing is one of the first symptoms of a claustrophobic attack   sheerin said .   when you feel your chest tightening  you d be wise to turn away from the window .    i want to see what s happening .    fine .  fine .  whatever you like  then .   theremon opened his eyes wide and drew two or three long breaths .   you don t think i can take it  do you .   wearily sheerin said   i don t know anything about anything  theremon .  things are changing from moment to moment  aren t they .   hello  here s beenay .    the astronomer had interposed himself between the light and the pair in the corner .  sheerin squinted up at him uneasily .   hello  beenay .    mind if i join you .   he asked .   my reckonings are set  and there s nothing for me to do till totality .   beenay paused and eyed the apostle  who was poring intently through a small leather bound book that he had drawn from the sleeve of his robe .   say  weren t we going to put him away .    we decided not to   theremon said .   do you know where siferra is  beenay .  i saw her a little while ago  but she doesn t seem to be here now .    upstairs  in the dome .  she wanted to get a view through the big telescope .  not that there s anything much to see that we can t see with our naked eyes .    what about kalgash two .   theremon asked .   what s there to see .  darkness in darkness .  we can see the effect of its presence as it moves in front of dovim .  kalgash two itself  though it s just a chunk of night against the night sky .    night    sheerin mused .   what a strange word that is .    not any more   said theremon .   so you don t actually see the wandering satellite at all  even with the big telescope .   beenay looked abashed .   our telescopes really aren t very good  you know .  they do fine for solar observations  but let it get just a little dark  and   he shook his head .  his shoulders were thrown back and he seemed to be working hard to pull air into his lungs .   but kalgash two is real  all right .  the strange zone of darkness that s passing between us and dovim that s kalgash two .   sheerin said   have you been having trouble breathing  beenay .    a little .   he sniffled .   a cold  i guess .    a touch of claustrophobia  more likely .    you think .    i m pretty sure .  anything else feel strange .    well   beenay said   i get the impression that my eyes are going back on me .  things seem to blur  and well  nothing is as clear as it ought to be .  and i m cold  too .    oh  that s no illusion .  it s cold  all right   theremon said  grimacing .   my toes feel as if i ve been shipping them cross country in a refrigeration car .    what we need right now   sheerin said intensely   is to distract ourselves from the effects we re feeling .  keep our minds busy  that s the thing .  i was telling you a moment ago  theremon  why faro s experiments with the holes in the roof came to nothing .    you were just beginning   theremon replied  playing along .  he huddled down  encircling a knee with both arms and nuzzling his chin against it .  what i ought to do  he thought  is excuse myself and go upstairs to find siferra  now that the time before totality is running out .  but he found himself curiously passive  unwilling to move .  or  he wondered  am i just afraid to face her .  sheerin said   what i was about to propose was that they were misled by taking the book of revelations literally .  there probably wasn t any sense in attaching any physical significance to the concept of stars .  it might be  you know  that in the presence of total and sustained darkness the mind finds it absolutely necessary to create light .  this illusion of light might be all that the stars really are .    in other words   theremon said  starting to get caught up in it now   you mean the stars are the results of the madness and not one of the causes .  then what good will the photographs that the astronomers are taking this evening be .    to prove that the stars are an illusion  maybe .  or to prove the opposite  for all i know .  then again   beenay had drawn his chair closer  and there was an expression of sudden enthusiasm on his face .   as long as you re on the subject of stars   he began .   i ve been thinking about them myself  and i ve come up with a really interesting notion .  of course  it s just a wild speculation  and i m not trying to put it forth in any serious way .  but it s worth thinking about .  do you want to hear it .    why not .   sheerin said  leaning back .  beenay looked a little reluctant .  he smiled shyly and said   well then  supposing there were other suns in the universe .   theremon repressed a laugh .   you said this was really wild  but i didn t imagine    no  it isn t as crazy as that .  i don t mean other suns right close at hand that we somehow mysteriously aren t able to see .  i m talking about suns that are so far away that their light isn t bright enough for us to make them out .  if they were nearby  they d be as bright as onos  maybe  or tano and sitha .  but as it is  the light they give off seems to us like nothing more than a little point of illumination  and it s drowned out by the constant glare from our six suns .   sheerin said   but what about the law of universal gravitation .  aren t you overlooking that .  if these other suns are there  wouldn t they be disturbing our world s orbit the way kalgash two does  and why  then  haven t you observed it .    good point   said beenay .   but these suns  let s say  are really far off maybe as much as four light years away  or even more .    how many years is a light year .   theremon asked .   not how many .  how far .  a light year is a measure of distance the distance light travels in a year .  which is an immense number of miles  because light is so fast .  we ve measured it at something like         miles an hour  and my suspicion is that that isn t a really precise figure  that if we had better instruments we d find out that the speed of light is even a little faster than that .  but even figuring at         miles an hour  we can calculate that onos is about ten light minutes from here  and tano and sitha about eleven times as far as that  and so on .  so a sun that s a few light years away  why  that would be really distant .  we d never be able to detect any perturbations they might be causing in kalgash s orbit  because they d be so minor .  all right  let s say that there are a lot of suns out there  everywhere around us in the heavens  at a distance of four to eight light years say  a dozen or two such suns  maybe .   theremon whistled .   what an idea for a great weekend supplement piece .  two dozen suns in a universe eight light years across .  gods .  that would shrink our universe into insignificance .  imagine it kalgash and its suns just a little trivial suburb of the real universe  and here we ve been thinking that we re the whole thing  just us and our six suns  all alone in the cosmos .    it s only a wild notion   said beenay with a grin   but you see where i m heading  i hope .  during eclipse  these dozen suns would suddenly become visible  because for a little while there d be no real sunlight to drown them out .  since they re so far off  they d appear small  like so many little marbles .  but there you d have it  the stars .  the suddenly emerging points of light that the apostles have been promising us .    the apostles talk of  countless numbers  of stars   sheerin said .   that doesn t seem like a dozen or two to me .  more like a few million  wouldn t you think .    poetic exaggeration   said beenay .   there just isn t room enough in the universe for a million suns not even if they were jammed right up against each other so that they touched .    besides   theremon offered   once we get up to a dozen or two  can we really grasp distinctions of numbers .  two dozen stars would seem like a  countless  number  i bet especially if there happens to be an eclipse going on and everybody is wacky already from staring at darkness .  you know  there are tribes in the backwoods that have only three numbers in their language  one    two    many   we re a little more sophisticated than that  maybe .  so for us one to two dozen are comprehensible  and then it just feels like  countless  to us .   he shivered with excitement .   a dozen suns  suddenly .  imagine it .   beenay said   there s more .  another cute little notion .  have you ever thought what a simple problem gravitation would be if only you had a sufficiently simple system .  supposing you had a universe in which there was a planet with only one sun .  the planet would travel in a perfect ellipse and the exact nature of the gravitational force would be so evident it could be accepted as an axiom .  astronomers on such a world would start off with gravity probably before they even invent the telescope .  naked eye observation would be enough to let them figure things out .   sheerin looked doubtful .   but would such a system be dynamically stable .   he asked .   sure .  they call it the  one and one  case .  it s been worked out mathematically  but it s the philosophical implications that interest me .    it s nice to think about   admitted sheerin   as a pretty abstraction like a perfect gas or absolute zero .    of course   continued beenay   there s the catch that life would be impossible on such a planet .  it wouldn t get enough heat and light  and if it rotated there would be total darkness half of each day .  that was the planet you once asked me to imagine  remember  sheerin .  where the native inhabitants would be fully adapted to alternating daylight and night .  but i ve been thinking about that .  there wouldn t be any native inhabitants .  you couldn t expect life which is fundamentally dependent upon light to develop under such extreme conditions of light deprivation .  half of every axial rotation spent in darkness .  no  nothing could exist under conditions like that .  but to continue just speaking hypothetically  the  one and one  system would    wait a minute   sheerin said .   that s pretty glib of you  saying life wouldn t have developed there .  how do you know .  what s so fundamentally impossible about life evolving in a place that has darkness half the time .    i told you  sheerin  life is fundamentally dependent upon light .  and therefore in a world where    life here is fundamentally dependent on light .  but what does that have to do with a planet that    it stands to reason  sheerin .    it stands to circular reason .   sheerin retorted .   you define life as such and such a kind of phenomenon that occurs on kalgash  and then you try to claim that on a world that s totally unlike kalgash life would be   theremon burst suddenly into harsh gusts of laughter .  sheerin and beenay looked at him indignantly .   what s so funny .   beenay demanded .   you are .  the two of you .  an astronomer and a psychologist having a furious argument about biology .  this must be the celebrated interdisciplinary dialogue that i ve heard so much about  the great intellectual ferment for which this university is famous .   the newspaperman stood up .  he was growing restless anyway  and beenay s long disquisition on abstract matters was making him even edgier .   excuse me  will you .  i need to stretch my legs .    totality s almost here   beenay pointed out .   you may not want to be off by yourself when that happens .    just a little stroll  and then i ll be back   said theremon .  before he had taken five steps  beenay and sheerin had resumed their argument .  theremon smiled .  it was a way of easing the tension  he told himself .  everybody was under tremendous pressure .  after all  each tick of the clock was bringing the world closer to full darkness closer to  to the stars .  to madness .  to the time of the heavenly flames .  theremon shrugged .  he had gone through a hundred gyrations of mood in the past few hours  but now he felt oddly calm  almost fatalistic .  he had always believed that he was the master of his own destiny  that he was able to shape the course of his life  that was how he had succeeded in getting himself into places where other newspapermen hadn t remotely had a chance .  but now everything was beyond his control  and he knew it .  come darkness  come stars  come flame  it would all happen without a by your leave from him .  no sense consuming himself in jittery anticipation  then .  just relax  sit back  wait  watch it all happen .  and then  he told himself then make sure that you survive whatever turmoil follows .   going up to the dome .   a voice asked .  he blinked in the half darkness .  it was the chubby little graduate student astronomer faro  was that his name .   yes  as a matter of fact   theremon said  though in truth he had had no particular destination in mind .   so am i .  come on  i ll take you there .   a spiral metal staircase wound upward into the high vaulted top story of the huge building .  faro went chugging up the stairs in a thudding short legged gait  and theremon loped along behind him .  he had been in the observatory dome once before  years ago  when beenay wanted to show him something .  but he remembered very little about the place .  faro pulled back a heavy sliding door  and they went in .   come for a close look at the stars .   siferra asked .  the tall archaeologist was standing just inside the doorway  watching the astronomers at their work .  theremon reddened .  siferra wasn t what he wanted to run into just now .  too late he recalled that this was where beenay had said she had gone .  despite the ambiguous smile she had seemed to cast his way at the moment of the eclipse s beginning  he still feared the sting of her scorn for him  her anger over what she saw as his betrayal of the observatory group .  but she showed no sign now of hard feelings .  perhaps  now that the world was plunging headlong into the cave of darkness  she felt that anything that had happened before the eclipse was irrelevant  that the coming catastrophe canceled out all errors  all quarrels  all sins .   what a place .   theremon said .   isn t it amazing .  not that i really know much of what s going on here .  they ve got the big solarscope trained on dovim it s really a camera more than it is a spyglass  they told me  you can t just squint through it and see the heavens and then these smaller telescopes are focused deeper out  watching for some sign that the stars are appearing    have they spotted them yet .    not so far as anyone s told me   siferra said .  theremon nodded .  he looked around .  this was the heart of the observatory  the room where the actual scanning of the skies took place .  it was the darkest room he had ever been in  not truly dark  of course  there were bronze sconces arrayed in a double row around the curving wall  but the glow that came from the lamps they held was faint and perfunctory .  in the dimness he saw a great metal tube going upward and disappearing through an open panel in the roof of the building .  he was able to glimpse the sky through the panel also .  it had a terrifying dense purple hue now .  the diminishing orb of dovim was still visible  but the little sun seemed to have retreated to an enormous distance .   how strange it all looks   he murmured .   the sky has a texture i ve never seen before .  it s thick it s like some sort of blanket  almost .    a blanket that will smother us all .    frightened .   he asked .   of course .  aren t you .    yes and no   theremon said .   i mean  i m not trying to sound particularly heroic  believe me .  but i m not nearly as edgy as i was an hour or two ago .  numb  more than anything .    i think i know what you mean .    athor says there s already been some rioting in the city .    it s only the beginning   siferra replied .   theremon  i can t get those ashes out of my mind .  the ashes of the hill of thombo .  those big blocks of stone  the foundations of the cyclopean city and ashes everywhere at their base .    with older ashes below  down and down and down .    yes   she said .  he realized that she had moved a little closer to him .  he realized also that the animosity she had felt toward him over the past few months seemed to be completely gone  and could it be .  she appeared to be responding to some ghost of the attraction that he had once had for her .  he knew the symptoms .  he was much too experienced a man not to know them .  fine  theremon thought .  the world is coming to an end  and now  suddenly  siferra is finally willing to put aside her ice queen costume .  a weird  gawky figure  immensely tall  came slithering by them in a clumsy jerky way .  he offered them a giggly greeting .   no sign of the stars yet   he said .  it was yimot  the other young graduate student .   maybe we won t get to see them at all .  it ll all turn out to be a fizzle  like the experiment faro and i rigged up in that dark building .    plenty of dovim s still visible   theremon pointed out .   we re nowhere near total darkness .    you sound almost eager for it   said siferra .  he turned to her .   i d like to get the waiting over with .    hey .   someone yelled .   my computer s down .    the lights  .   came another voice .   what s happening .   siferra asked .   power failure   theremon said .   just as sheerin predicted .  the generating station must be in trouble .  the first wave of madmen  running amok in the city .   indeed the dim lights in the sconces appeared to be on the verge of going out .  first they grew very much brighter  as if a quick final surge of power had gone rushing through them  then they dimmed  then they brightened again  but not as much as a moment before  and then they dropped to just a fraction of their normal light output .  theremon felt siferra s hand gripping his forearm tightly .   they re out   someone said .   and so are the computers cut in the backup power  somebody .  hey .  backup power .    fast .  the solarscope isn t tracking .  the camera shutter won t work .   theremon said   why didn t they prepare for something like this .   but apparently they had .  there came a thrumming from somewhere in the depths of the building  and then the screens of the computers scattered around the room winked back to life .  the lamps in their sconces did not  though .  evidently they were on another circuit  and the emergency generator in the basement would not restore them to functioning .  the observatory was practically in full darkness .  siferra s hand still rested on theremon s wrist .  he debated slipping a comforting arm around her shoulders .  then athor s voice could be heard .   all right  give me a hand here .  we ll be okay in a minute .    what s he got .   theremon asked .   athor s brought out the lights   came the voice of yimot .  theremon turned to stare .  it wasn t easy to see anything  in such a low light level  but in another moment his eyes grew somewhat accustomed to it .  there were half a dozen foot long inch thick rods cradled in athor s arms .  he glared over them at the staff members .   faro .  yimot .  come here and help me .   the young men trotted to the observatory director s side and took the rods from him .  one by one  yimot held them up  while faro  in utter silence  scraped a large clumsy match into spluttering life with the air of one performing the most sacred rite of a religious ritual .  as he touched the flame to the upper end of each of the rods  the little blaze hesitated a moment  playing futilely about the tip  until a sudden crackling flare cast athor s lined face into yellow highlights .  a spontaneous cheer ran through the great room .  the rod was tipped by six inches of wavering flame .   fire .   theremon wondered .   in here .  why not use godlights  or something .    we discussed it   said siferra .   but godlights are too faint .  they re all right for a small bedroom  just a little cozy presence to get you through the sleeping period  but for a place this size    and downstairs .  are they lighting torches there too .    i think so .   theremon shook his head .   no wonder the city s going to burn this evening .  if even you people are resorting to something as primitive as fire to hold back the darkness   the light was dim  dimmer even than the most tenuous sunlight .  the flames reeled crazily  giving birth to drunken  swaying shadows .  the torches smoked devilishly and smelled like a bad day in the kitchen .  but they emitted yellow light .  there was something joyous about yellow light  theremon thought .  especially after nearly four hours of somber  dwindling dovim .  siferra warmed her hands at the nearest  regardless of the soot that gathered upon them in a fine  gray powder  and muttered ecstatically to herself .   beautiful .  beautiful .  i never realized before what a wonderful color yellow is .   but theremon continued to regard the torches suspiciously .  he wrinkled his nose at the rancid odor and said   what are those things made out of .    wood   she replied .   oh  no  they re not .  they aren t burning .  the top inch is charred and the flame just keeps shooting up out of nothing .    that s the beauty of it .  this is a really efficient artificial light mechanism .  we made a few hundred of them  but most went to the sanctuary  of course .  you see  she turned and dusted off her blackened hands  you take the pithy core of coarse water reeds  dry them thoroughly  and soak them in animal grease .  then you set fire to it and the grease burns  little by little .  these torches will burn for almost half an hour without stopping .  ingenious  isn t it .    wonderful   theremon said dourly .   very modern .  very impressive .   but he couldn t remain in this room any longer .  the same restlessness that had led him to come up here now afflicted him again .  the reek of the torches was bad enough  but also there was the cold blast of air coming in through the open panel in the dome  a harsh wintry flow  the icy finger of night .  he shivered .  he wished that he and sheerin and beenay hadn t finished off that whole bottle of miserable wine so quickly .   i m going to go back below   he said to siferra .   there s nothing to see here if you aren t an astronomer .    all right .  i ll go with you .   in the flickering yellow light he saw a smile appear on her face  unmistakable this time  unambiguous .   they made their way down the clattering spiral staircase to the lower room .  not much had changed down there .  the people on the lower level had lit torches there too .  beenay was busy at three computers at once  processing data from the telescopes upstairs .  other astronomers were doing other things  all of them incomprehensible to theremon .  sheerin was wandering around by himself  a lost soul .  folimun had carried his chair directly beneath a torch and continued reading  lips moving in the monotonous recital of invocations to the stars .  through theremon s mind ran phrases of description  bits and pieces of the article he had planned to write for tomorrow s saro city chronicle .  several times earlier in the evening the writing machine in his brain had clicked on the same way  a perfectly methodical  perfectly conscientious  and  as he was only too well aware  perfectly meaningless procedure .  it was wholly preposterous to imagine that there was going to be an issue of the chronicle tomorrow .  he exchanged glances with siferra .   the sky   she murmured .   i see it  yes .   it had changed tone again .  now it was darker still  a horrible deep purple red  a monstrous color  as though some enormous wound in the fabric of the heavens were gushing fountains of blood .  the air had grown  somehow  denser .  dusk  like a palpable entity  entered the room  and the dancing circle of yellow light about the torches etched itself into ever sharper distinction against the gathering grayness beyond .  the odor of smoke here was just as cloying as it had been upstairs .  theremon found himself bothered even by the little chuckling sounds that the torches made as they burned  and by the soft pad of sheerin s footsteps as the heavyset psychologist circled round and round the table in the middle of the room .  it was getting harder to see  torches or no .  so now it begins  theremon thought .  the time of total darkness and the coming of the stars .  for an instant he thought it might be wisest to look for some cozy closet to lock himself into until it was all over .  stay out of the way  avoid the sight of the stars  hunker down and wait for things to become normal again .  but a moment s contemplation told him what a bad idea that was .  a closet any sort of enclosed place would be dark too .  instead of being a safe snug harbor  it might become a chamber of terrors far more frightening than the rooms of the observatory .  and then too  if something big was going to happen  something that would reshape the history of the world  theremon didn t want to be tucked away with his head under his arm while it was going on .  that would be cowardly and foolish  and it might be something he would regret all the rest of his life .  he had never been the sort of man to hide from danger  if he thought there might be a story in it .  besides  he was just self confident enough to believe that he would be able to withstand whatever was about to occur and there was just enough skepticism left in him so that at least part of him wondered whether anything significant was going to happen at all .  he stood still  listening to siferra s occasional indrawn breaths  the quick little respirations of someone trying to retain composure in a world that was all too swiftly retreating into the shadow .  then came another sound  a new one  a vague  unorganized impression of sound that might well have gone unnoticed but for the dead silence that prevailed in the room and for theremon s unnatural focus of attention as the moment of totality grew near .  the newspaperman stood tensely listening  holding his breath .  after a moment he carefully moved toward the window and peered out .  the silence ripped to fragments at his startled shout   sheerin .   there was an uproar in the room .  they were all looking at him  pointing  questioning .  the psychologist was at his side in a moment .  siferra followed .  even beenay  crouched in front of his computers  swung around to look .  outside  dovim was a mere smoldering splinter  taking one last desperate look at kalgash .  the eastern horizon  in the direction of the city  was lost in darkness  and the road from saro city to the observatory was a dull red line .  the trees of the wooded tracts that bordered the highway on both sides had lost all individuality and merged into a continuous shadowy mass .  but it was the highway itself that held attention  for along it there surged another  and infinitely menacing  shadowy mass  surging like a strange shambling beast up the slopes of observatory mount .   look   theremon cried hoarsely .   someone tell athor .  the madmen from the city .  folimun s people .  they re coming .    how long to totality .   sheerin asked .   fifteen minutes   beenay rasped .   but they ll be here in five .    never mind  keep everyone working   sheerin said .  his voice was steady  controlled  unexpectedly commanding  as though he had managed to tap into some deep reservoir of inner strength in this climactic moment .   we ll hold them off .  this place is built like a fortress .  you  siferra  go upstairs and let athor know what s happening .  you  beenay  keep an eye on folimun .  knock him down and sit on him if you have to  but don t let him out of your sight .  theremon  come with me .   sheerin was out the door  and theremon followed at his heels .  the stairs stretched below them in tight  circular sweeps around the central shaft  fading into a dank and dreary grayness .  the first momentum of their rush had carried them fifty feet down  so that the dim  flickering yellow from the open door of the room behind them had disappeared  and both up above and down the same dusky shadow crushed in upon them .  sheerin paused  and his pudgy hand clutched at his chest .  his eyes bulged and his voice was a dry cough .  his whole body was quivering in fear .  whatever the final source of resolve he had found a moment ago now seemed exhausted .   i can t  .   .   .  breathe  .   .   .  go down  .   .   .  yourself .  make sure all doors are closed   theremon took a few downward steps .  then he turned .   wait .  can you hold out a minute .   he was panting himself .  the air passed in and out of his lungs like so much molasses  and there was a little germ of screeching panic in his mind at the thought of making his way farther below by himself .  what if the guards had left the main door open  somehow .  it wasn t the mob he was afraid of .  it was  darkness .  theremon realized that he was  after all  afraid of the dark .   stay here   he said unnecessarily to sheerin  who was huddled dismally on the staircase where theremon had left him .   i ll be back in a second .   he dashed upward two steps at a time  heart pounding not altogether from the exertion tumbled into the main room  and snatched a torch from its holder .  siferra stared at him  eyes wide with bewilderment .   shall i come with you .   she asked .   yes .  no .  no .   he ran out again .  the torch was foul smelling  and the smoke smarted his eyes almost blind  but he clutched that torch as if he wanted to kiss it for joy .  its flame streamed backward as he hurtled down the stairs again .  sheerin hadn t budged .  he opened his eyes and moaned as theremon bent over him .  the newspaperman shook him roughly .   all right  get hold of yourself .  we ve got light .   he held the torch at tiptoe height  and  propping the tottering psychologist by an elbow  made his way downward again  protected now by the sputtering circle of illumination .  on the ground floor everything was black .  theremon felt the horror rising within him again .  but the torch sliced a way through the darkness for him .   the security men   sheerin said .  where were they .  had they fled .  it looked that way .  no  there were a couple of the guards athor had posted  jammed up against the corner of the hallway  trembling like jelly .  their eyes were blank  their tongues were lolling .  of the others there was no sign .   here   theremon said brusquely  and passed the torch to sheerin .   you can hear them outside .   and they could .  little scraps of hoarse  wordless shouts .  but sheerin had been right  the observatory was built like a fortress .  erected in the last century  when the neo gavottian style of architecture was at its ugly height  it had been designed for stability and durability  rather than for beauty .  the windows were protected by the grillwork of inch thick iron bars sunk deep into the concrete sills .  the walls were solid masonry that an earthquake couldn t have touched  and the main door was a huge oaken slab reinforced with iron at the strategic points .  theremon checked the bolts .  they were still in place .   at least they can t just walk right in the way folimun did   he said  panting .   but listen to them .  they re right outside .    we have to do something .    damned right   theremon said .   don t just stand there .  help me drag these display cases up against the doors and keep that torch out of my eyes .  the smoke s killing me .   the cases were full of books  scientific instruments  all sorts of things  a whole museum of astronomy .  the gods only knew what the display cases weighed  but some supernal force had taken possession of theremon in this moment of crisis  and he heaved and pulled them into place aided  more or less  by sheerin as though they were pillows .  the little telescopes and other gadgets within them went tumbling over as he jockeyed the heavy cases into position .  there was the sound of breaking glass .  beenay will kill me  theremon thought .  he worships all that stuff .  but this was no moment for being delicate .  he slammed one case after another up against the door  and in a few minutes had built a barricade that might  he hoped  serve to hold back the mob if it succeeded in breaking through the gate .  somewhere  dimly  far off  he could hear the battering of bare fists against the door .  screams yells  it was all like a ghastly dream .  the mob had set out from saro city driven by the hunger for salvation  the salvation held forth by the apostles of flame  which could be attained now  they had been told  only by the destruction of the observatory .  but as the moment of darkness drew near a maddening fear had all but stripped their minds of the ability to function .  there was no time to think of ground cars  or of weapons  or of leadership  or even of organization .  they had rushed to the observatory on foot  and they were assaulting it with bare hands .  and now that they were there  the last flash of dovim  the last ruby red drop of sunlight  flickered feebly over a humanity that had nothing left but stark  universal fear .  theremon groaned .   let s get back upstairs .   there was no sign of anyone now in the room where they had been gathered .  they had all gone to the topmost floor  into the observatory dome itself .  as he came rushing in  theremon was struck by an eerie calmness that seemed to prevail in there .  it was like a tableau .  yimot was seated in the little lean back seat at the control panel of the gigantic solarscope as if this were just an ordinary evening of astronomical research .  the rest were clustered about the smaller telescopes  and beenay was giving instructions in a strained  ragged voice .   get it straight  all of you .  it s vital to snap dovim just before totality and change the plate .  here  you you one of you to each camera .  we need all the redundancy we can get .  you all know about about times of exposure   there was a breathless murmur of agreement .  beenay passed a hand over his eyes .   are the torches still burning .  never mind  i see them .   he was leaning hard against the back of a chair .   now remember  don t don t try to look for fancy shots .  when the stars appear  don t waste time trying to get t two of them in the scope field at a time .  one is enough .  and  .   .   .  and if you feel yourself going  get away from the camera .   at the door  sheerin whispered to theremon   take me to athor .  i don t see him .   the newspaperman did not answer immediately .  the vague forms of the astronomers wavered and blurred  and the torches overhead had become only yellow splotches .  the room was cold as death .  theremon felt siferra s hand graze his for a moment only a moment and then he was unable to see her .   it s dark   he whimpered .  sheerin held out his hands .   athor .   he stumbled forward .   athor .   theremon stepped after him and seized his arm .   wait .  i ll take you .   somehow he made his way across the room .  he closed his eyes against the darkness and his mind against the pounding chaos that was rising within it .  no one heard them or paid attention to them .  sheerin stumbled against the wall .   athor .    is that you  sheerin .    yes .  yes .  athor .    what is it  sheerin .   athor s voice  unmistakably .   i just wanted to tell you don t worry about the mob the doors are strong enough to hold them out    yes .  of course   athor muttered .  he sounded  theremon thought  as if he were many miles away .  light years away .  suddenly another figure was among them  moving swiftly  a whirling flail of arms .  theremon thought it might be yimot or even beenay  but then he felt the rough fabric of a cultist s robe and knew that it must be folimun .   the stars .   folimun cried .   here come the stars .  get out of my way .   he s trying to get to beenay  theremon realized .  to destroy the blasphemous cameras .   watch out   theremon called .  but beenay still sat huddled in front of the computers that activated the cameras  snapping away as the full darkness swept down .  theremon reached out .  he caught hold of folimun s robe  yanked  twisted .  suddenly there were clutching fingers at his throat .  he staggered crazily .  there was nothing before him but shadows  the very floor beneath his feet lacked substance .  a knee drove hard into his gut  and he grunted in a blinding haze of pain and nearly fell .  but after the first gasping moment of agony his strength returned .  he seized folimun by the shoulders  somehow swung him around  hooked his arm around the apostle s throat .  at the same moment he heard beenay croak   i ve got it .  at your cameras  everyone .   theremon seemed conscious of everything at once .  the entire world was streaming through his pounding mind and everything was in chaos  everything was screaming with terror .  there came the strange awareness that the last thread of sunlight had thinned out and snapped .  simultaneously he heard one last choking gasp from folimun  and a heavy bellow of amazement from beenay  and a queer little cry from sheerin  a hysterical giggle that cut off in a rasp  and a sudden silence  a strange  deadly silence  from outside .  folimun had gone limp in his loosening grasp .  theremon peered into the apostle s eyes and saw the blankness of them  staring upward  mirroring the feeble yellow of the torches .  he saw the bubble of froth upon folimun s lips and heard the low animal whimper in folimun s throat .  with the slow fascination of fear  he lifted himself on one arm and turned his eyes toward the bloodcurdling blackness of the sky .  through it shone the stars .  not the one or two dozen of beenay s pitiful theory .  there were thousands of them  blazing with incredible power  one next to another next to another next to another  an endless wall of them  forming a dazzling shield of terrifying light that filled the entire heavens .  thousands of mighty suns shone down in a soul searing splendor that was more frighteningly cold in its awful indifference than the bitter wind that shivered across the cold  horribly bleak world .  they hammered at the roots of his being .  they beat like flails against his brain .  their icy monstrous light was like a million great gongs going off at once .  my god  he thought .  my god  my god  my god .  but he could not tear his eyes away from the hellish sight of them .  he looked up through the opening in the dome  every muscle rigid  frozen  and stared in helpless wonder and horror at that shield of fury that filled the sky .  he felt his mind shrinking down to a tiny cold point under that unceasing onslaught .  his brain was no bigger than a marble  rattling around in the hollow gourd that was his skull .  his lungs would not work .  his blood ran backward in his veins .  at last he was able to close his eyes .  he knelt for a time  panting  murmuring to himself  fighting to regain control .  then theremon staggered to his feet  his throat constricting him to breathlessness  all of the muscles of his body writhing in a tensity of terror and sheer fear beyond bearing .  dimly he was aware of siferra somewhere near him  but he had to struggle to remember who she was .  he had to work at remembering who he was .  from below came the sound of a terrible steady pounding  a frightful hammering against the door some strange wild beast with a thousand heads  struggling to get in  it didn t matter .  nothing mattered .  he was going mad  and knew it  and somewhere deep inside a bit of sanity was screaming  struggling to fight off the hopeless flood of black terror .  it was very horrible to go mad and know that you were going mad to know that in a little minute you would be here physically and yet all the real essence that was you would be dead and drowned in the black madness .  for this was the dark the dark and the cold and the doom .  the bright walls of the universe were shattered and their awful black fragments were falling down to crush and squeeze and obliterate  him .  someone came crawling toward him on hands and knees and jostled up against him .  theremon moved aside .  he put his hands to his tortured throat and limped toward the flames of the torches that filled all his mad vision .   light .   he screamed .  athor  somewhere  was crying  whimpering horribly like a terribly frightened child .   stars all the stars we didn t know at all .  we didn t know anything .  we thought six stars is a universe is something the stars didn t notice is darkness forever and ever and ever and the walls are breaking in and we didn t know we couldn t know and anything   someone clawed at the torch  and it fell and snuffed out .  in that instant the awful splendor of the indifferent stars leaped nearer to them .  from below came the sound of screams and shouts and breaking glass .  the mob  crazed and uncontrollable  had broken into the observatory .  theremon looked around .  by the awful light of the stars he saw the dumbstruck figures of the scientists lurching about in horror .  he made his way into the corridor .  a fierce blast of chilly air coming through an open window struck him  and he stood there  letting it hit his face  laughing a little at the arctic intensity of it .   theremon .   a voice called behind him .   theremon .   he went on laughing .   look   he said  after a time .   those are the stars .  this is the flame .   on the horizon outside the window  in the direction of saro city  a crimson glow began growing  strengthening in brightness  that was not the glow of a sun .  the long night had come again .   three  daybreak  the first thing of which theremon became aware  after a long period of being aware of nothing at all  was that something huge and yellow was hanging over him in the sky .  it was an immense blazing golden ball .  there was no way he could look at it for more than a fraction of a second  on account of its brilliance .  searing heat was coming from it in pulsing waves .  he huddled in a crouching position  head downward  and crossed his wrists in front of his eyes to protect himself from that great outpouring of heat and light overhead .  what  he wondered  kept it up there .  why didn t it simply fall .  if it falls  he thought  it will fall on me .  where can i hide .  how can i protect myself .  for a long moment he hunkered down where he was  hardly daring to think .  then  cautiously  he opened his eyes just a slit .  the gigantic blazing thing was still there in the sky .  it hadn t moved an inch .  it wasn t going to fall on him .  he began to shiver despite the heat .  the dry  choking smell of smoke came to him .  something was burning  not very far away .  it was the sky  he thought .  the sky was burning .  the golden thing is setting fire to the world .  no .  no .  there was another reason for the smoke .  he would remember it in a moment  if only he could clear the haze out of his mind .  the golden thing hadn t caused the fires .  it hadn t even been here when the fires started .  it was those other things  those cold glittering white things that filled the sky from end to end they had done it  they had sent the flames  what were they called .  the stars .  yes  he thought .  the stars .  and he began to remember  just a little  and he shivered again  a deep convulsive quiver .  he remembered how it had been when the stars came out  and his brain had turned to a marble and his lungs refused to pump air and his soul had screamed in the deepest of horror .  but the stars were gone now .  that bright golden thing was in the sky instead .  the bright golden thing .  onos .  that was its name .  onos  the sun .  the main sun .  one of one of the six suns .  yes .  theremon smiled .  things were beginning to come back to him now .  onos belonged in the sky .  the stars did not .  the sun  the kindly sun  good warm onos .  and onos had returned .  therefore all was well with the world  even if some of the world seemed to be on fire .  six suns .  then where were the other five .  he even remembered their names .  dovim  trey  patru  tano  sitha .  and onos made six .  he saw onos  all right it was right above him  it seemed to fill half the sky .  what about the rest .  he stood up  a little shakily  still half afraid of the hot golden thing overhead  wondering now if perhaps he stood up too far he would touch it and be burned by it .  no  no  that didn t make any sense .  onos was good  onos was kind .  he smiled .  looked around .  any more suns up there .  there was one .  very far off  very small .  not frightening  this one the way the stars had been  the way this fiery hot globe overhead was .  just a cheerful white dot in the sky  nothing more .  small enough to put in his pocket  almost  if he could only reach it .  trey  he thought .  that one is trey .  so its sister patru ought to be somewhere nearby  yes .  yes  that s it .  down there  in the corner of the sky  just to the left of trey .  unless that one s trey  and the other one is patru .  well  he told himself  the names don t matter .  which one is which  unimportant .  together they are trey and patru .  and the big one is onos .  and the other three suns must be somewhere else right now  because i don t see them .  and my name s  theremon .  yes .  that s right .  i m theremon .  but there s a number  too .  he stood frowning  thinking about it  his family code  that s what it was  a number he had known all his life  but what was it .  what was it .      .  yes .  i am theremon     .  and then another  more complex thought followed smoothly along  i am theremon     of the saro city chronicle .  somehow that statement made him feel a little better  though it was full of mysteries for him .  saro city .  the chronicle .  he almost knew what those words meant .  almost .  he chanted them to himself .  saro saro saro .  city city city .  chronicle chronicle chronicle .  saro city chronicle .  perhaps if i walk a little  he decided .  he took a hesitant step  another  another .  his legs were a little wobbly .  looking around  he realized that he was on a hillside out in the country somewhere .  he saw a road  bushes  trees  a lake off to the left .  some of the bushes and trees seemed to have been ripped and broken  with branches dangling at odd angles or lying on the ground below them  as though giants had come trampling through this countryside recently .  behind him was a huge round topped building with smoke rising from a hole in its roof .  the outside of the building was blackened as if fires had been set all around it  though its stone walls appeared to have withstood the flames well enough .  he saw a few people lying scattered on the steps of the building  sprawled like discarded dolls .  there were others lying in the bushes  and still others along the path leading down the hill .  some of them were faintly moving .  most were not .  he looked the other way .  on the horizon he saw the towers of a great city .  a heavy pall of smoke hung over them  and when he squinted he imagined that he could see tongues of flame coming from the windows of the tallest buildings  although something rational within his mind told him that it was impossible to make out any such detail at so great a distance .  that city had to be miles away .  saro city  he thought suddenly .  where the chronicle is published .  where i work .  where i live .  and i m theremon .  yes .  theremon     .  of the saro city chronicle .  he shook his head slowly from side to side  as some wounded animal might have done  trying to clear it of the haze and torpor that infested it .  it was maddening  not being able to think properly  not being able to move around freely in the storehouse of his own memories .  the brilliant light of the stars lay like a wall across his mind  cutting him off from his own memories .  but things were beginning to get through .  colored fragments of the past  sharp edged  shimmering with manic energy  were dancing around and around in his brain .  he struggled to make them hold still long enough for him to comprehend them .  the image of a room came to him  then .  his room  heaped with papers  magazines  a couple of computer terminals  a box of unanswered mail .  another room  a bed .  the small kitchen that he almost never used .  this  he thought  is the apartment of theremon      the well known columnist for the saro city chronicle .  theremon himself is not at home at this time  ladies and gentlemen .  at the present moment theremon is standing outside the ruins of the saro university observatory  trying to understand  the ruins  saro university observatory   siferra .   he called .   siferra  where are you .   no answer .  he wondered who siferra was .  someone he must have known before the ruins were ruined  probably .  the name had come bubbling up out of the depths of his troubled mind .  he took another few uncertain steps .  there was a man lying under a bush a short distance downhill .  theremon went to him .  his eyes were closed .  he held a burned out torch in his hand .  his robe was torn .  sleeping .  or was he dead .  theremon prodded him carefully with his foot .  yes  dead .  that was strange  all these dead people lying around .  you didn t ordinarily see dead people everywhere like this  did you .  and an overturned car over there it looked dead  too  with its undercarriage turned pathetically toward the sky  and curls of smoke rising sluggishly from its interior .   siferra .   he called again .  something terrible had happened .  that seemed very clear to him  though hardly anything else did .  once again he crouched  and pressed his hands against the sides of his head .  the random fragments of memory that had been jigging around in there were moving more slowly now  no longer engaged in a frantic dance  they had begun to float about in a stately fashion  like icebergs drifting in the great southern ocean .  if he could only get some of those drifting fragments to come together force them into a pattern that made a little sense  he reviewed what he had already managed to reconstruct .  his name .  the name of the city .  the names of the six suns .  the newspaper .  his apartment .  last evening  the stars  siferra beenay sheerin athor names  abruptly things began to form connections in his mind .  the memory fragments of his immediate past had finally started to reassemble themselves .  but at first nothing yet made real sense  because each little cluster of memories was something independent unto itself  and he was unable to put them into any kind of coherent order .  the harder he tried  the more confused everything became again .  once he understood that  he gave up the idea of trying to force anything .  just relax  theremon told himself .  let it happen naturally .  he had  he realized  suffered some great wound of the mind .  although he felt no bruises  no lumps on the back of his head  he knew that he must have been injured in some way .  all his memories had been cut into a thousand pieces as though by a vengeful sword  and the pieces had been stirred and scattered like the pieces of some baffling puzzle .  but he seemed to be healing  moment by moment .  moment by moment  the strength of his mind  the strength of the entity that was theremon     of the saro city chronicle  was reasserting itself  putting him back together .  stay calm .  wait .  let it happen naturally .  he drew in his breath  held it  slowly released it .  breathed in again .  hold  release .  breathe  hold  release .  breathe  hold  release .  in his mind s eye he saw the interior of the observatory .  remembering  now .  it was evening .  only the little red sun was in the sky dovim  that was its name .  that tall woman  she was siferra .  and the fat man was sheerin  and the young slender earnest one  he was beenay  and the fierce old man with the patriarchal mane of white hair was the great famous astronomer  the head of the observatory ithor .  uthor .  athor  yes .  athor .  and the eclipse was coming .  the darkness .  the stars .  oh  yes .  yes .  it was all flowing together now .  the memories returning .  the mob outside the observatory  led by fanatics in black robes  the apostles of flame  that s what they were called .  and one of the fanatics had been inside the observatory .  folimun  his name was .  folimun    .  he remembered .  the moment of totality .  the sudden and complete descent of night .  the world entering the cave of darkness .  the stars  the madness the screaming the mob  theremon winced at the recollection .  the hordes of crazed  frightened people from saro city breaking down the heavy doors  bursting into the observatory  trampling each other in their rush to destroy the blasphemous scientific instruments and the blasphemous scientists who denied the reality of the gods  now that the memories came flooding back  he almost wished he had not recaptured them .  the shock he had felt at the first moment of seeing the brilliant light of the stars the pain that had erupted within his skull the strange horrific bursts of cold energy racing across his field of vision .  and then the coming of the mob that moment of frenzy the struggle to escape siferra beside him  and beenay nearby  and then the mob surging around them like a river in full spate  separating them  pulling them in opposite directions  into his mind came a single last glimpse of old athor  his eyes bright and glazed with the wildness of utter madness  standing majestically on a chair  furiously ordering the intruders out of his building as though he were not merely the director of the observatory but its king .  and beenay standing next to him  tugging at athor s arm  urging the old man to flee .  then the scene dissolved .  he was no longer in the great room .  theremon saw himself swept down a corridor  scrambling for a staircase  looking around for siferra  for anyone he knew  the apostle  the fanatic  folimun     suddenly appearing before him  blocking his way in the midst of the chaos .  laughing  holding out a hand to him in a mocking gesture of false friendship .  then folimun too had disappeared from sight  and theremon continued frantically onward  down the spiral stairs  tumbling and stumbling  clambering over people from the city who were wedged so tightly together on the ground floor that they were unable to move .  out the door  somehow .  into the chill of night .  standing bareheaded  shivering  in the darkness that was darkness no longer  for everything was illuminated now by the terrible  hideous  unthinkable cold blaze of those thousands of merciless stars that filled the sky .  there was no hiding from them .  even when you closed your eyes you saw their frightful light .  mere darkness was nothing  compared with the implacable pressure of that heaven spanning vault of unthinkable brilliance  a light so bright that it boomed in the sky like thunder .  theremon remembered that he had felt as though the sky  stars and all  was about to fall on him .  he had knelt and covered his head with his hands  futile though he knew that to be .  he remembered  too  the terror all about him  people rushing this way and that  the shrieking  the crying .  the fires of the blazing city leaping high on the horizon .  and above all else those hammering waves of fear descending from the sky  from the remorseless unforgiving stars that had invaded the world .  that was all .  everything after that was blank  utterly blank  until the moment of his awakening  when he looked up to see onos in the sky once more  and began to put back together the shards and slivers of his mind .  i am theremon      he told himself again .  i used to live in saro city and write a column for the newspaper .  there was no saro city any longer .  there was no newspaper .  the world had come to an end .  but he still lived  and his sanity  he hoped  was returning .  what now .  where to go .   siferra .   he called .  no one answered .  slowly he began to shuffle down the hill once more  past the broken trees  past the burned and overturned cars  past the scattered bodies .  if this is what it looks like out here in the country  he thought  what must it be like in the city itself .  my god  he thought again .  all you gods .  what have you done to us .   sometimes cowardice has its advantages  sheerin told himself  as he unbolted the door of the storeroom in the observatory basement where he had spent the time of darkness .  he still felt shaky  but he had no doubt that he was still sane .  as sane as he had ever been  at any rate .  it seemed quiet out there .  and although the storeroom had no windows  enough light had managed to make its way through a grating high up along one of its walls so that he was fairly confident that morning had come  that the suns were in the sky again .  perhaps the madness had passed by this time .  perhaps it was safe for him to come out .  he poked his nose out into the hallway .  cautiously he looked around .  the smell of smoke was the first thing he perceived .  but it was a stale  musty  nasty  damp  acrid kind of smoke smell  the smell of a fire that has been extinguished .  the observatory was not only a building made of stone  but it had a highly efficient sprinkler system  which must have gone into operation as soon as the mob began setting fires .  the mob .  sheerin shuddered at the recollection .  the rotund psychologist knew that he would never forget the moment when that mob had come bursting into the observatory .  it would haunt him as long as he lived those twisted  distorted faces  those berserk eyes  those howling cries of rage .  these were people who had lost their fragile grip on sanity even before the totality of the eclipse .  the deepening darkness had been enough to push them over the edge that  and the skillful rabble rousing of the apostles of flame  triumphant now in their moment of fulfilled prophecy .  so the mob had come  by the thousands  to root out the despised scientists in their lair  and there they were  now  rushing in  waving torches  clubs  brooms  anything at all with which they could hit  smash  ruin .  paradoxically enough  it was the coming of the mob that had jolted sheerin into being able to get a grip on himself .  he had had a bad moment  back there when he and theremon first went downstairs to barricade the doors .  he had felt all right  even strangely buoyant  on the way down  but then the first reality of the darkness had hit him  like a whiff of poison gas  and he had folded up completely .  sitting huddled up there on the stairs  cold with panic  remembering his trip through the tunnel of mystery and realizing that this time the trip would last not only a few minutes but for hour upon intolerable hour .  well  theremon had pulled him out of that one  and sheerin had recovered some of his self control as they returned to the upper level of the observatory .  but then came totality and the stars .  though sheerin had turned his head away when that ungodly blast of light first came bursting through the opening in the observatory roof  he had not been able completely to avoid the shattering sight of it .  and for an instant he could feel his mind s grip giving way could feel the delicate thread of sanity beginning to sunder  but then had come the mob  and sheerin knew that the issue wasn t simply one of preserving his sanity  any more .  it was one of saving his life .  if he wanted to survive this night he had no choice but to hold himself together and find a place of safety .  gone was his naive plan to observe the darkness phenomena like the aloof  dispassionate scientist he pretended to be .  let someone else observe the darkness phenomena .  he was going to hide .  and so  somehow  he had made his way to the basement level  to that cheery little storeroom with its cheery little godlight casting a feeble but very comforting glow .  and bolted the door  and waited it out .  he had even slept  a little .  and now it was morning .  or perhaps afternoon  for all he knew .  one thing was certain  the terrible night was over  and everything was calm  at least in the vicinity of the observatory .  sheerin tiptoed into the hall  paused  listened  started warily up the stairs .  silence everywhere .  puddles of dirty water  from the sprinklers .  the foul reek of old smoke .  he halted on the stairway and thoughtfully removed a firehatchet from a bracket on the wall .  he doubted very much that he could ever bring himself to use a hatchet on another living thing  but it might be a useful thing to be carrying  if conditions outside were as anarchic as he expected to find them .  up to the ground floor  now .  sheerin pulled the basement door open the same door that he had slammed behind him in his frenzied downward flight the evening before and looked out .  the sight that greeted him was horrifying .  the great hall of the observatory was full of people  all scrambled together on the floor  sprawled every which way  as though some colossal drunken orgy had been going on all night .  but these people weren t drunk .  many of them lay twisted in ghastly impossible angles that only a corpse could have adopted .  others lay flat  stacked like discarded carpets in heaps two or three people high .  they too seemed dead  or lost in the last unconsciousness of life .  still others were plainly alive  but sat whimpering and mewling like shattered things .  everything that once had been on display in the great hall  the scientific instruments  the portraits of the great early astronomers  the elaborate astronomical charts  had been pulled down and burned or simply pulled apart and trampled .  sheerin could see the charred and battered remains jutting up here and there amidst the crush of bodies .  the main door was open .  the warm and heartening glow of sunlight was visible beyond .  carefully sheerin picked his way through the chaos toward the exit .   dr .  sheerin .   a voice said suddenly  unexpectedly .  he whirled  brandishing his hatchet so fiercely that he came close to laughing at his own feigned belligerence .   who s there .    me .  yimot .    who .    yimot .  you remember me  don t you .    yimot  yes .   the gangling  gawky young graduate astronomy student from some backwoods province .  sheerin saw the boy now  half hidden in an alcove .  his face was blackened with ashes and soot and his clothing was torn  and he looked stunned and shaken  but he seemed otherwise to be all right .  as he came forward  in fact  he moved in a far less comical way than usual  none of his jerky mannerisms  no wild swings of his arms or twitches of his head .  terror does strange things to people  sheerin told himself .    have you been hiding here all through the night .    i tried to get out of the building when the stars came  but i got jammed up in here .  have you seen faro  dr .  sheerin .    your friend .  no .  i haven t seen anyone .    we were together for a while .  but then  with all the shoving and pushing  things got so wild   yimot managed an odd smile .   i thought they would burn the building down .  but then the sprinklers came on .   he pointed at the townspeople who lay all around .    are they all dead  do you think .    some of them are just insane .  they saw the stars .    i did too  just for a moment   yimot said .   just for a moment .    what were they like .   sheerin asked .   you didn t see them  doctor .  or is it that you just don t remember .    i was in the basement .  nice and snug .   yimot craned his long neck upward as though the stars were still blazing in the ceiling of the hallway .   they were awesome   he whispered .   i know that doesn t tell you anything  but that s the only word i can use .  i saw them only for two seconds  maybe three  and i could feel my mind spinning  i could feel the top of my head starting to lift off  so i looked away .  because i m not very brave  dr .  sheerin .    no .  neither am i .    but i m glad i had those two or three seconds .  the stars are very frightening  but they re also very beautiful .  at least to an astronomer they are .  they were nothing at all like those silly little pinpricks of light that faro and i created in that stupid experiment of ours .  we must be right in the middle of an immense cluster of them  you know .  we have our six suns in a tight group close by us some of them closer than others  i mean and then farther back  five or ten light years back  or more  there s this whole giant sphere of stars  which are suns  thousands of suns  a tremendous globe of suns completely enclosing us  but invisible to us normally because of the light of our own suns shining all the time .  just as beenay said .  beenay s a wonderful astronomer  you know .  he ll be greater than dr .  athor some day .   you didn t see the stars at all .    just the merest quick glimpse   said sheerin  a little sadly .   then i went and hid .   look  boy  we ve got to get ourselves out of this place .    i d like to try to find faro first .    if he s all right  he s outside .  if he isn t  there s nothing you can do for him .    but if he s underneath one of those heaps    no   sheerin said .   you can t go poking around those people .  they re all still stunned  but if you provoke them there s no telling what they ll do .  the safest thing is to get out of here .  i m going to try to make it to the sanctuary .  if you re smart  you ll come with me .    but faro    very well   sheerin said  with a sigh .   let s look for faro .  or beenay  or athor  or theremon  any of the others .   but it was hopeless .  for perhaps ten minutes they picked through the heaps of dead and unconscious and semi conscious people in the hallway  but none of them were university people .  their faces were appalling  horribly distorted by fear and madness .  some stirred when they were disturbed  and began to froth and mutter in a horrifying way .  one snatched at sheerin s hatchet  and sheerin had to use the butt end to push him away .  it was impossible to ascend the stairs to the upper levels of the building  the staircase was blocked by bodies  and there was broken plaster everywhere .  pools of muddy water had collected on the floor .  the harsh  piercing smell of smoke was intolerable .   you re right   yimot said finally .   we d better go .   sheerin led the way  stepping out into the sunlight .  after the hours that had just passed  golden onos was the most welcome sight in the universe  though the psychologist found his eyes unaccustomed to so much bright light after the long hours of darkness .  it hit him with almost tangible force .  for a few moments after he emerged he stood blinking  waiting for his eyes to readapt .  after a time he was able to see  and gasped at what he saw .   how awful   yimot murmured .  more bodies .  madmen wandering in circles  singing to themselves .  burned out vehicles by the side of the road .  the shrubbery and trees hacked up as though by blind monstrous forces .  and  off in the distance  a ghastly pall of brown smoke rising above the spires of saro city .  chaos  chaos  chaos .   so this is what the end of the world looks like   sheerin said quietly .   and here we are  you and i .  survivors .   he laughed bitterly .   what a pair we are .  i m carrying a hundred pounds too many around my middle and you ve got a hundred pounds too few .  but we re still here .  i wonder if theremon made it out of there alive .  if anyone did  he would have .  but i wouldn t have bet very much on you or me .   the sanctuary s midway between saro city and the observatory .  we ought to be able to walk it in half an hour or so  if we don t get into any trouble .  here  take this .   he scooped up a thick gray billy club that was lying beside one of the fallen rioters and tossed it to yimot  who caught it clumsily and stared at it as though he had no idea what it might be .   what will i do with it .   he asked finally .  sheerin said   pretend that you ll use it to bash in the skull of anybody that bothers us .  just as i m pretending that i d use this hatchet if i needed to defend myself .  and if necessary i will .  it s a new world out here  yimot .  come on .  and keep your wits about you as we go .    the darkness was still upon the world  the stars still were flooding kalgash with their diabolical rivers of light  when siferra    came stumbling out of the gutted observatory building .  but the faint pink glow of dawn was showing on the eastern horizon  the first hopeful sign that the suns might be returning to the heavens .  she stood on the observatory lawn  legs far apart  head thrown back  pulling breath deep down into her lungs .  her mind was numb .  she had no idea how many hours had passed since the sky had turned dark and the stars had erupted into view like the blast of a million trumpets .  all the night long she had wandered the corridors of the observatory in a daze  unable to find her way out  struggling with the madmen who swarmed about her on all sides .  that she had gone mad too was not something she stopped to think about .  the only thing on her mind was survival  beating back the hands that clutched at her  parrying the swinging clubs with blows of the club that she herself had snatched up from a fallen man  avoiding the screaming  surging stampedes of maniacs who rumbled arm in arm in groups of six or eight through the hallways  trampling everyone in their way .  it seemed to her that there were a million townsfolk loose in the observatory .  wherever she turned she saw distended faces  bulging eyes  gaping mouths  lolling tongues  fingers crooked into monstrous claws .  they were smashing everything .  she had no idea where beenay was  or theremon .  she vaguely remembered seeing athor in the midst of ten or twenty bellowing hoodlums  his thick mane of white hair rising above them and then seeing him go down  swept under and out of sight .  beyond that siferra remembered nothing very clearly .  for the whole duration of the eclipse she had run back and forth  up one hallway and down the other like a rat caught in a maze .  she had never really been familiar with the layout of the observatory  but getting out of the building should not have been that difficult for her if she had been sane .  now  though  with the stars blazing relentlessly at her out of every window  it was as if an icepick had been driven through her brain .  she could not think .  she could not think .  she could not think .  all she could do was run this way and that  shoving leering gibbering fools aside  shouldering her way through clotted gangs of ragged strangers  searching desperately and ineffectually and futilely for one of the main exits .  and so it went  for hour after hour  as though she were caught in a dream that would not end .  now  at last  she was outside .  she didn t know how she had gotten there .  suddenly there had been a door in front of her  at the end of a corridor that she was sure she had traversed a thousand times before .  she pushed and it yielded and a cool blast of fresh air struck her  and she staggered through .  the city was burning .  she saw the flames far away  a bright furious red stain against the dark background of sky .  she heard screams  sobs  wild laughter from all sides .  below her  a little way down the hillside  some men were mindlessly pulling down a tree tugging at its branches  straining fiercely  ripping its roots loose from the ground by sheer force .  she couldn t guess why .  probably neither could they .  in the observatory parking lot  other men were tipping cars over .  siferra wondered whether one of those cars might be hers .  she couldn t remember .  she couldn t remember very much at all .  remembering her name was something of an effort .   siferra   she said aloud .   siferra    .  siferra    .   she liked the sound of that .  it was a good name .  it had been her mother s name or her grandmother s  perhaps .  she wasn t really sure .   siferra      she said again .   i am siferra    .   she tried to remember her address .  no .  a jumble of meaningless numbers .   look at the stars .   a woman screamed  rushing past her .   look at the stars and die .    no   siferra replied calmly .   why should i want to die .   but she looked at the stars all the same .  she was almost getting used to the sight of them now .  they were like very bright lights very bright so close together in the sky that they seemed to merge  to form a single mass of brilliance  like a kind of shining cloak that had been draped across the heavens .  when she looked for more than a second or two at a time she thought she could make out individual points of light  brighter than those around them  pulsing with a bizarre vigor .  but the best that she could manage was to look for five or six seconds  then the force of all that pulsating light would overwhelm her  making her scalp tingle and her face turn burning hot  and she would have to lower her head and rub her fingers against the fiery  throbbing  angry place of pain between her eyes .  she walked through the parking lot  ignoring the frenzy going on all about her  and emerged on the far side  where a paved road led along a level ridge on the flank of observatory mount .  from some still functioning region of her mind came the information that this was the road from the observatory to the main part of the university campus .  up ahead  siferra could see some of the taller buildings of the university now .  flames were dancing on the roofs of some of them .  the bell tower was burning  and the theater  and the hall of student records .  you ought to save the tablets  said a voice within her mind that she recognized as her own .  tablets .  what tablets .  the thombo tablets .  oh .  yes  of course .  she was an archaeologist  wasn t she .  yes .  yes .  and what archaeologists did was dig for ancient things .  she had been digging in a place far away .  sagimot .  beklikan .  something like that .  and had found tablets  prehistoric texts .  ancient things  archaeological things .  very important things .  in a place called thombo .  how am i doing .  she asked herself .  and the answer came  you re doing fine .  she smiled .  she was feeling better moment by moment .  it was the pink light of dawn on the horizon that was healing her  she thought .  the morning was coming  the sun  onos  entering the sky .  as onos rose  the stars became less bright  less terrifying .  they were fading fast .  already those in the east were dimmed by onos s gathering strength .  even at the opposite end of the sky  where darkness still reigned and the stars thronged like minnows in a pool  some of the intensity was starting to go from their formidable gleam .  she could look at the sky for several moments at a stretch now without feeling her head begin to throb painfully .  and she was feeling less confused .  she remembered clearly now where she lived  and where she worked  and what she had been doing the evening before .  at the observatory with her friends  the astronomers  who had predicted the eclipse  the eclipse  that was what she had been doing  she realized .  waiting for the eclipse .  for the darkness .  for the stars .  yes .  for the flames  siferra thought .  and there they were .  everything had happened right on schedule .  the world was burning  as it had burned so many times before set ablaze not by the hand of the gods  nor by the power of the stars  but by ordinary men and women  star crazed  cast into a desperate panic that urged them to restore the normal light of day by any means they could find .  despite the chaos all around her  though  she remained calm .  her injured mind  numbed  all but stupefied  was unable to respond fully to the cataclysm that darkness had brought .  she walked on and on  down the road  into the main quadrangle of the campus  past scenes of horrifying devastation and destruction  and felt no shock  no regret for what had been lost  no fear of the difficult times that must lie ahead .  not enough of her mind was restored yet for such feelings .  she was a pure observer  tranquil  detached .  the blazing building over there  she knew  was the new university library that she had helped to plan .  but the sight of it stirred no emotion in her .  she could just as well have been walking through some two thousand year old site whose doom was a cut and dried matter of historical record .  it would never have occurred to her to weep for a two thousand year old ruin .  it did not occur to her to weep now  as the university went up in flames all around her .  she was in the middle of the campus now  retracing familiar paths .  some of the buildings were on fire  some were not .  like a sleepwalker she turned left past the administration building  right at the gymnasium  left again at mathematics  and zigzagged past geology and anthropology to her own headquarters  the hall of archaeology .  the front door stood open .  she went in .  the building seemed almost untouched .  some of the display cases in the lobby were smashed  but not by looters  since all the artifacts appeared still to be there .  the elevator door had been wrenched off its hinges .  the bulletin board next to the stairs was on the floor .  otherwise everything apparently was intact .  she heard no sounds .  the place was empty .  her office was on the second floor .  on the way up the stairs she came upon the body of an old man lying face upward at the first floor landing .   i think i know you   siferra said .   what s your name .   he didn t answer .   are you dead .  tell me  yes or no .   his eyes were open  but there was no light in them .  siferra pressed her finger against his cheek .   mudrin  that s your name .  or was .  well  you were very old anyway .   she shrugged and continued upward .  the door to her office was unlocked .  there was a man inside .  he looked familiar too  but this one was alive  crouching against the file cabinets in a peculiar huddled way .  he was a burly  deep chested man with powerful forearms and broad  heavy cheekbones .  his face was bright with sweat and his eyes had a feverish gleam .   siferra .  you here .    i came to get the tablets   she told him .   the tablets are very important .  they have to be protected .   he rose from his crouch and took a couple of uncertain steps toward her .   the tablets .  the tablets are gone  siferra .  the apostles stole them  remember .    gone .    gone  yes .  like your mind .  you re out of your mind  aren t you .  your face is blank .  there s nobody home behind your eyes .  i can see that .  you don t even know who i am .    you are balik   she said  the name coming unbidden to her lips .   so you do remember .    balik .  yes .  and mudrin is on the stairs .  mudrin is dead  do you know that .   balik shrugged .   i suppose .  we ll all be dead in a little while .  the whole world s gone crazy out there .  but why am i bothering to tell you that .  you re crazy too .   his lips trembled .  his hands shook .  an odd little giggle burst from him  and he clenched his jaws as though to suppress it .   i ve been here all through the darkness .  i was working late  and when the lights started to fail my god   he said   the stars  the stars .  i had just one quick look at them .  and then i got under the desk and stayed there through the whole thing .   he went to the window .   but onos is coming up now .  the worst must be over .   is everything on fire out there  siferra .    i came for the tablets   she said again .   they re gone .   he spelled the word out for her .   do you understand me .  gone .  not here .  stolen .    then i will take the charts that we made   she said .   i must protect knowledge .    absolutely crazy  aren t you .  where were you  the observatory .  got a good view of the stars  did you .   he giggled again and started to cut diagonally across the room  moving closer to her .  siferra s face twisted with disgust .  she could smell the odor of his sweat now  sharp and harsh and disagreeable .  he smelled as if he hadn t bathed in a week .  he looked as if he hadn t slept in a month .   come here   he said  as she backed away from him .   i won t hurt you .    i want the charts  balik .    sure .  i ll give you the charts .  and the photographs and everything .  but first i m going to give you something else .  come here  siferra .   he reached for her and pulled her toward him .  she felt his hands on her breasts and the roughness of his cheek against her face .  the smell of him was unbearable .  fury rose in her .  how dare he touch her like this .  brusquely she pushed him away .   hey  don t do that  siferra .  come on .  be nice .  for all we know  there s just the two of us in the world .  you and me  we ll live in the forest and hunt little animals and gather nuts and berries .  hunters and gatherers  yes  and later on we ll invent agriculture .   he laughed .  his eyes looked yellow in the strange light .  his skin seemed yellow too .  again he reached for her  hungrily  one cupped hand seizing one of her breasts  the other sliding down her back toward the base of her spine .  he put his face down against the side of her throat and nuzzled her noisily like some kind of animal .  his hips were heaving and thrusting against her in a revolting way .  at the same time he began to force her backward toward the corner of the room .  suddenly siferra remembered the club that she had picked up somewhere during the night in the observatory building .  she was still holding it  loosely dangling in her hand .  swiftly she brought it upward and rammed the top of it against the point of balik s chin  hard .  his head snapped up and back  his teeth clattered together .  he let go of her and lurched a few steps backward .  his eyes were wide with surprise and pain .  his lip was split where he had bitten into it  and blood was pouring down on one side .   hey  you bitch .  what did you want to hit me for .    you touched me .    damn right i touched you .  and about time  too .   he rubbed his jaw .   listen  siferra  put that stick down and stop looking at me that way .  i m your friend .  your ally .  the world has turned into a jungle now  and there s just the two of us .  we need each other .  it isn t safe trying to go it alone now .  you can t afford to risk it .   again he came toward her  hands upraised  seeking her .  she hit him again .  this time she brought the club around and smashed it against the side of his cheek  connecting with bone .  there was an audible sharp sound of impact  and balik jerked to one side under the force of it .  with his head turned halfway away from her  he looked at her in utter astonishment and staggered back .  but he was still standing .  she hit him a third time  above his ear  swinging the club with all her strength in a long arc .  as he fell  siferra clubbed him once more  in the same place  and felt everything give beneath the blow .  his eyes closed and he made a strange soft sound  like an inflated balloon releasing its air  and sank down in the corner against the wall  with his head going one way and his shoulders the other .   don t ever touch me like that again   siferra said  prodding him with the tip of the club .  balik didn t reply .  he didn t move  either .  balik ceased to concern her .  now for the tablets  she thought  feeling wonderfully calm .  no .  the tablets were gone  balik had said .  stolen .  and she remembered now  they really were .  they had disappeared just before the eclipse .  all right  the charts then .  all those fine drawings they had made of the hill of thombo .  the stone walls  the ashes at the foundation lines .  those ancient fires  just like the fire that was ravaging saro city at this very moment .  where were they .  oh .  here .  in the chart cabinet  where they belonged .  she reached in  grabbed a sheaf of the parchment like papers  rolled them  tucked them under her arm .  now she remembered the fallen man  and glanced at him .  but balik still hadn t moved .  he didn t look as though he was going to  either .  out the office door  down the stairs .  mudrin remained where he had been before  sprawled out motionless and stiff on the landing .  siferra ran around him and continued to the ground floor .  outside  the morning was well along .  onos was climbing steadily and the stars were pale now against its brightness .  the air seemed fresher and cleaner  though the odor of smoke was thick on the breeze .  down by the mathematics building she saw a band of men smashing windows .  they caught sight of her a moment later and shouted to her  raucous  incoherent words .  a couple of them began to run toward her .  her breast ached where balik had squeezed it .  she didn t want any more hands touching her now .  turning  siferra darted behind the archaeology building  pushed her way through the bushes on the far side of the pathway in back  ran diagonally across a lawn  and found herself in front of a blocky gray building that she recognized as botany .  there was a small botanical garden behind it  and an experimental arboretum on the hillside beyond that  at the edge of the forest that encircled the campus .  looking back  siferra thought she saw the men still pursuing her  though she couldn t be sure .  she sprinted past the botany building and easily leaped the low fence around the botanical garden .  a man riding a mowing machine waved at her .  he wore the olive drab uniform of the university gardeners  and he was methodically mowing the bushes  cutting a wide swath of destruction back and forth across the center of the garden .  he was chuckling to himself as he worked .  siferra went around him .  from there it was a short run into the arboretum .  were they still following her .  she didn t want to take the time to glance behind her .  just run  run  run  that was the best idea .  her long  powerful legs carried her easily between the rows of neatly planted trees .  she moved in steady strides .  it felt good  running like this .  running .  running .  then she came to a rougher zone of the arboretum  all brambles and thorns  everything tightly interwoven .  unhesitatingly siferra plunged into it  knowing no one would go after her there .  the branches clawed at her face  ripped at her clothing .  as she pushed her way through one dense patch she lost her grip on the roll of charts  and emerged on the far side without them .  let them go  she thought .  they don t mean anything any more anyway .  but now she had to rest .  panting  gasping with exhaustion  she vaulted across a little stream at the border of the arboretum and dropped down on a patch of cool green moss .  no one had followed her .  she was alone .  she looked up  through the tops of the trees .  the golden light of onos flooded the sky .  the stars could no longer be seen .  the night was over at last  and the nightmare too .  no  she thought .  the nightmare is just beginning .  waves of shock and nausea rolled through her  the strange numbness that had afflicted her mind all through the night was beginning to lift .  after hours of mental dissociation  she was starting to comprehend the patterns of things again  to put one event and another and another together and understand their meaning .  she thought of the campus in ruins  and the flames rising above the distant city .  the wandering madmen everywhere  the chaos  the devastation .  balik .  the ugly grin on his face as he tried to paw her .  and the look of amazement on it when she had hit him .  i ve killed a man today  siferra thought in astonishment and dismay .  me .  how could i ever have done a thing like that .  she began to tremble .  the horrifying memory seared her mind  the sound the club had made when she hit him  the way balik had staggered backward  the other blows  the blood  the twisted angle of his head .  the man with whom she had worked for a year and a half  patiently digging out the ruins at beklimot  falling like a slaughtered beast under her deadly bludgeoning .  and her utter calmness as she stood over him afterward her satisfaction at having prevented him from annoying her any more .  that was perhaps the ghastliest part of it all .  then siferra told herself that what she had killed hadn t been balik  but only a madman inside balik s body  wild eyed and drooling as he clawed and fondled her .  nor had she really been siferra when she wielded that club  but a ghost siferra  a dream siferra  sleepwalking through the horrors of the dawn .  now  though  sanity was returning .  now the full impact of the night s events was coming home to her .  not just balik s death she would not let herself feel guilt for that but the death of an entire civilization .  she heard voices in the distance  back in the direction of the campus .  thick  bestial voices  the voices of those whose minds had been destroyed by the stars and would never again be whole .  she searched for her club .  had she lost that too  in her frenzied flight through the arboretum .  no .  no  here it was .  siferra grasped it and rose to her feet .  the forest seemed to beckon to her .  she turned and fled into its cool dark groves .  and went on running as long as her strength held out .  what else was there to do but go on running .  running .  running .  it was late afternoon  the third day since the eclipse .  beenay came limping down the quiet country road that led to the sanctuary  moving slowly and carefully  looking about him in all directions .  there were three suns shining in the sky  and the stars had long since returned to their age old obscurity .  but the world had irrevocably changed in those three days .  and so had beenay .  this was the young astronomer s first full day of restored reasoning power .  what he had been doing for the two previous days he had no clear idea .  the whole period was simply a blur  punctuated by the rising and setting of onos  with other suns wandering across the sky now and then .  if someone had told him that this was the fourth day since the catastrophe  or the fifth or sixth  beenay would not have been able to disagree .  his back was sore  his left leg was a mass of bruises  and there were blood encrusted scratches along the side of his face .  he hurt everywhere  though the pain of the early hours had given way by now to dull aches of half a dozen different kinds radiating from various parts of his body .  what had been happening .  where had he been .  he remembered the battle in the observatory .  he wished he could forget it .  that howling  screaming horde of crazed townspeople breaking down the door a handful of robed apostles were with them  but mainly they were just ordinary people  probably good  simple  boring people who had spent their whole lives doing the good  simple  boring things that kept civilization operating .  now  suddenly  civilization had stopped operating and all those pleasant ordinary people had been transformed in the twinkling of an eye into raging beasts .  the moment when they came pouring in how terrible that had been .  smashing the cameras that had just recorded the priceless data of the eclipse  ripping the tube of the great solarscope out of the observatory roof  raising computer terminals high over their heads and dashing them to the floor  and athor rising like a demigod above them  ordering them to leave  .  one might just as well have ordered the tides of the ocean to turn back .  beenay remembered imploring athor to come away with him  to flee while there still might be a chance .   let go of me  young man .   athor had roared  hardly seeming even to recognize him .   get your hands off me  sir .   and then beenay had realized what he should have seen before  that athor had gone insane  and that the small part of athor s mind that was still capable of functioning rationally was eager for death .  what was left of athor had lost all will to survive to go forth into the dreadful new world of the post eclipse barbarism .  that was the most tragic single thing of all  beenay thought  the destruction of athor s will to live  the great astronomer s hopeless surrender in the face of this holocaust of civilization .  and then the escape from the observatory .  that was the last thing that beenay remembered with any degree of confidence  looking back at the main observatory room as athor disappeared beneath a swarm of rioters  then turning  darting through a side door  scrambling down the fire escape  out the back way into the parking lot  where the stars were waiting for him in all their terrible majesty .  with what he realized later had been sublime innocence  or else self confidence verging on arrogance  beenay had totally underestimated their power .  in the observatory at the moment of their emergence he had been too preoccupied with his work to be vulnerable to their force  he had merely noted them as a remarkable occurrence  to be examined in detail when he had a free moment  and then had gone on with what he was doing .  but out here  under the merciless vault of the open sky  the stars had struck him in their fullest might .  he was stunned by the sight of them .  the implacable cold light of those thousands of suns descended upon him and knocked him groveling to his knees .  he crawled along the ground  choking with fear  sucking in sharp gasps of breath .  his hands were shaking feverishly  his heart was palpitating  streams of sweat were running down his burning face .  when some shred of the scientist he once had been motivated him to turn his face toward that colossal brilliance overhead  so that he could examine and analyze and record  he was compelled to hide his eyes after only a second or two .  he could remember that much  the struggle to look at the stars  his failure  his defeat .  after that  everything was murky .  a day or two  he guessed  of wandering in the forest .  voices in the distance  cackling laughter  harsh discordant singing .  fires crackling on the horizon  the bitter smell of smoke everywhere .  kneeling to plunge his face in a brook  cool swift water sweeping along his cheek .  a pack of small animals surrounding him not wild ones  beenay decided afterward  but household pets that had escaped  and baying at him as though they meant to rip him apart .  pulling berries off a vine .  climbing a tree to strip it of tender golden fruit  and falling off  landing with a disastrous thud .  the long hours of pain before he could pick himself up and move onward .  a sudden furious fight in the deepest  darkest part of the woods fists flailing  elbows jabbing into ribs  wild kicks  then stone throwing  bestial screeching  a man s face pushed close up against his own  eyes red as flame  fierce wrestling  the two of them rolling over and over reaching for a massive rock  bringing it down in a single decisive motion  hours .  days .  a feverish daze .  then  on the morning of the third day  remembering finally who he was  what had happened .  thinking of raissta  his contract mate .  remembering that he had promised to go to her at the sanctuary when his work at the observatory was done .  the sanctuary now where was that .  beenay s mind had healed enough for him to recall that the place of refuge that the university people had established for themselves was midway between the campus and saro city  in an open  rural area of rolling plains and grassy meadows .  the physics department s old particle accelerator was there  a vast underground chamber  abandoned a few years back when they had built the new research center at saro heights .  it hadn t been difficult to equip the echoing concrete rooms for short term occupation by several hundred people  and  since the accelerator site had always been sealed off from easy access for security reasons  it was no problem to make the site safe against any sort of invasion by townsfolk who might be driven insane during the eclipse .  but in order to find the sanctuary  beenay first had to find out where be was .  and he had been wandering randomly in a dismal stupor for at least two days  perhaps more .  he could be anywhere .  in the early morning hours he found his way out of the forest  almost by accident  stepping forth unexpectedly into what had once been a neatly laid out residential district .  it was deserted now  and in frightening disarray  with cars piled up every which way in the streets where their owners had left them when they no longer were capable of driving  and the occasional body lying in the street under a black cluster of flies .  there was no sign that anyone was alive here .  he spent a long morning trudging along a suburban highway lined by blackened  abandoned homes  without recognizing a single familiar landmark .  at midday  as trey and patru rose into the sky  he entered a house through its open door and helped himself to whatever food he could find that had not spoiled .  no water came out of the kitchen tap  but he found a cache of bottled water in the basement and drank as much of that as he could hold .  he bathed himself in the rest .  afterward he proceeded up a winding road to a hilltop cul de sac of spacious  imposing dwellings  every one of them burned to a shell .  nothing at all was left of the uppermost house except a hillside patio decorated with pink and blue tiles  no doubt very handsome once  but marred now by thick black lumps of clotted debris scattered along its gleaming surface .  with difficulty he made his way out onto it and looked out into the valley beyond .  the air was very still .  no planes were aloft  there was no sound of ground traffic  a weird silence resounded from every direction .  suddenly beenay knew where he was  and everything fell into place .  the university was visible off to his left  a handsome cluster of brick buildings  many of them now streaked with black smoke stains and some seeming to be altogether destroyed .  beyond  on its high promontory  was the observatory .  beenay glanced at it quickly and looked away  glad that at this distance he was unable to make out its condition very clearly .  far away to his right was saro city  gleaming in the bright sunlight .  to his eyes it seemed almost untouched .  but he knew that if he had a pair of field glasses he would surely see shattered windows  fallen buildings  still glowing embers  rising wisps of smoke  all the scars of the conflagration that had broken out at nightfall .  straight below him  between the city and the campus  was the forest in which he had been wandering during the time of his delirium .  the sanctuary would be just on the far side of that  he might well have passed within a few hundred yards of its entrance a day or so ago  all unknowing .  the thought of crossing that forest again did not appeal to him .  surely it was still full of madmen  cutthroats  irate escaped pets  all manner of troublesome things .  but from his vantage point on the hilltop he could see the road that cut across the forest  and the pattern of streets that led to the road .  stick to paved routes  he told himself  and you ll be all right .  and so he was .  onos was still in the sky when he completed the traversal of the forest highway and turned onto the small rural road that he knew led to the sanctuary .  afternoon shadows had barely begun to lengthen when he came to the outer gate .  once past that  beenay knew  he had to go down a long unpaved road that would take him to the second gate  and thence around a couple of outbuildings to the sunken entrance to the sanctuary itself .  the outer gate  a high metal mesh screen  was standing open when he reached it .  that was an unexpected and ominous sight .  had the mob come roaring in here too .  but there was no sign of mob destruction .  everything was as it should be  except that the gate was open .  he went on in  puzzled  and made his way down the unpaved road .  the inner gate  at least  was closed .   i am beenay      he said to it  and gave his university identification code number .  moments passed  and lengthened into minutes  and nothing happened .  the green scanner eye overhead seemed to be working he saw its lens sliding from side to side but perhaps the computers that operated it had lost their power  or had been smashed altogether .  he waited .  he waited some more .   i am beenay      he said again  finally  and gave his number a second time .   i am authorized to enter here .   then he remembered that mere name and number were not enough  there was a password to say  also .  but what was it .  panic churned his soul .  he couldn t remember .  he couldn t remember .  how absurd  finally to have found his way here and then be stranded at the outer gate by his own stupidity .  the password the password  something to do with the catastrophe  that was it .   eclipse .   no  not that .  he wracked his aching brain .   kalgash two .   didn t seem right .   dovim .    onos .    stars .   that was closer .  then it came to him .   nightfall   he said triumphantly .  still nothing happened  at least not for a long while .  but then  what seemed like a thousand years later  the gate opened to admit him .  he zigzagged past the outbuildings and confronted the oval metal door of the sanctuary itself  set at a forty five degree angle into the ground .  another green eye studied him here .  did he have to identify himself all over .  evidently he did .   i am beenay      he said  preparing for another long wait .  but the gate began immediately to roll back .  he stared down into the sanctuary s concrete floored vestibule .  raissta     was waiting for him there  scarcely ten yards away .   beenay .   she cried  and came rushing toward him .   oh  beenay  beenay   since they had first become contract mates  two years earlier  they had never been apart longer than eighteen hours .  now they had been separated for days .  he pulled her slim form up against him and held her tight  and it was a long while before he would release her .  then he realized they were still standing in the open gateway of the sanctuary .   shouldn t we go in and lock the gate behind us .   he asked .   what if i ve been followed .  i don t think i was  but    it doesn t matter .  there s no one else here .    what .    they all went yesterday   she said .   as soon as onos came up .  they wanted me to come too  but i said i was going to wait for you  and i did .   he gaped at her  uncomprehendingly .  he saw now how weary and haggard she looked  how drawn and thin .  her once lustrous hair was hanging in unkempt strings and her face was pale  unadorned .  her eyes were reddened and puffy .  she seemed to have aged five or ten years .   raissta  how long has it been since the eclipse .    this is the third day .    three days .  that was more or less what i figured .   his voice echoed strangely .  he glanced past her  into the deserted sanctuary .  the bare underground chamber stretched on and on  lit by a track of overhead bulbs .  he saw no one as far as his eye could reach .  he hadn t expected this  not at all .  the plan had been for everyone to stay hidden down here until it was safe to emerge .  in wonder he said   where have they gone .    amgando   raissta said .   amgando national park .  but that s hundreds of miles from here .  were they crazy  coming out of hiding on only the second day and going marching off to some place halfway across the country .  do you have any idea what s going on out there  raissta .   amgando park was a nature preserve  far to the south  a place where wild animals roamed  where the native plants of the province were jealously protected .  beenay had been there once  when a boy  with his father .  it was almost pure wilderness  with a few hiking trails cut into it .  she said   they thought it would be safer to go there .    safer .    word came that everyone who was still sane  everybody who wanted to take part in the rebuilding of society  should rendezvous at amgando .  apparently people are converging on it from all over  thousands of them .  from other universities  mostly .  and some government people .    fine .  a whole horde of professors and politicians trampling around in the park .  with everything else ruined  why not ruin the last bit of unspoiled territory we have  too .    that isn t important  beenay .  the important thing is that amgando park is in the hands of sane people  it s an enclave of civilization in the general madness .  and they knew about us  they were asking us to come join them .  we took a vote  and it was two to one to go .    two to one   said beenay darkly .   even though you people didn t see the stars  you managed to go nuts anyway .  imagine leaving the sanctuary to take a three hundred mile stroll or is it five hundred .  through the utter chaos that s going on .  why not wait a month  or six months  or whatever .  you had enough food and water to hold out here for a year .    we said the same thing   raissta replied .   but what they told us  the amgando people  was that the time to come was now .  if we waited another few weeks  the roving bands of crazed men out there would coalesce into organized armies under local warlords  and we d have to deal with them when we came out .  and if we waited any longer than a few weeks  the apostles of flame would probably have established a repressive new government  with its own police force and army  and we d be intercepted the moment we stepped outside the sanctuary .  it s now or never  the amgando people said .  better to have to contend with scattered half insane free lance bandits than with organized armies .  so we decided to go .    everyone but you .    i wanted to wait for you .   he took her hand .   how did you know i d come .    you said you would .  as soon as you were finished photographing the eclipse .  you always keep your promises  beenay .    yes   beenay said  in a remote tone of voice .  he had not yet recovered from the shock of finding the sanctuary empty .  it had been his hope to rest here  to heal his bruised body  to complete the job of restoring his stars shattered mind .  what were they supposed to do now  set up housekeeping here by themselves  just the two of them in this echoing concrete vault .  or try to get to amgando all alone .  the decision to vacate the sanctuary made a sort of crazy sense  beenay supposed assuming it made any sense at all for everyone to collect at amgando  it was probably better to make the journey now  while the countryside was in such a high degree of disorder  than to wait until new political entities  whether apostles or private regional buccaneers  clamped down on all travel between districts .  but he had wanted to find his friends here to sink down into a community of familiar people until he had recovered from the shock of the past few days .  dully he said   do you have any real idea of what s going on out there  raissta .    we got reports by communicator  until the communicator channels broke down .  apparently the city was almost completely destroyed by fire  and the university was badly damaged also that s all true  isn t it .   beenay nodded .   so far as i know  it is .  i escaped from the observatory just as a mob came smashing in .  athor was killed  i m pretty sure .  all the equipment was wrecked all our observations of the eclipse were ruined    oh  beenay  i m so sorry .    i managed to get out the back way .  the moment i was outside  the stars hit me like a ton of bricks .  two tons .  you can t imagine what it was like  raissta .  i m glad you can t imagine it .  i was out of my mind for a couple of days  roaming around in the woods .  there s no law left .  it s everybody for himself .  i may have killed someone in a fight .  people s household animals are running wild the stars must have made them crazy too and they re terrifying .    beenay  beenay    all the houses are burned .  this morning i came through that fancy neighborhood on the hill just south of the forest  onos point  is that what it s called .  and it was unbelievable  the destruction .  not a living soul to be seen .  wrecked cars  bodies in the streets  the houses in ruins my god  raissta  what a night of madness .  and the madness is still going on .    you sound all right   she said .   shaken  but not    crazy .  but i was .  from the moment i first came out under the stars until i woke up today .  then things finally began to knit back together in my head .  but i think it s much worse for most other people .  the ones who hadn t the slightest degree of emotional preparation  the ones who simply looked up and  bam .  the suns were gone  the stars were shining .  as your uncle sheerin said  there ll be a whole range of responses  from short term disorientation to total and permanent insanity .   quietly raissta said   sheerin was with you at the observatory during the eclipse  wasn t he .    yes .    and afterward .    i don t know .  i was busy overseeing the photographing of the eclipse .  i don t have any idea what became of him .  he didn t seem to be in sight when the mob broke in .   with a faint smile raissta said   perhaps he slipped away in the confusion .  uncle is like that very quick on his feet  sometimes  when there s trouble .  i d hate to have had anything bad happen to him .    raissta  something bad has happened to the whole world .  athor may have had the right idea  better just to let it sweep over you and carry you away .  that way you don t have to contend with worldwide insanity and chaos .    you mustn t say that  beenay .    no .  no  i mustn t .   he came up behind her and lightly stroked her shoulders .  bent forward  softly nuzzled behind her ear .    raissta  what are we going to do .    i think i can guess   she said .  despite everything  he laughed .   i mean afterward .    let s worry about that afterward   she told him .   theremon had never been much of an outdoorsman .  he thought of himself as a city boy through and through .  grass  trees  fresh air  the open sky he didn t actually mind them  but they held no particular appeal for him .  for years his life had shuttled along a fixed urban based triangular orbit  rigidly following a familiar path bounded at one corner by his little apartment  at another by the chronicle office  by the six suns club at the third .  now  suddenly  he was a forest dweller .  the strange thing was that he almost liked it .  what the citizens of saro city called  the forest  was actually a fair sized woodsy tract that began just southeast of the city itself and stretched for a dozen miles or so along the south bank of the seppitan river .  there once had been a great deal more of it  a vast wilderness sweeping on a great diagonal across the midsection of the province almost to the sea  but most of it had gone to agriculture  much of the remainder had been cut up into suburban residential districts  and the university had taken a goodly nip some fifty years back for what was then its new campus .  unwilling to have itself engulfed by urban development  the university had then agitated to have what was left set aside as a park preserve .  and since the rule in saro city for many years had been that whatever the university wanted the university usually got  the last strip of the old wilderness was left alone .  that was where theremon found himself living now .  the first two days had been very bad .  his mind was still half fogged by the effects of seeing the stars  and he was unable to form any clear plan .  the main thing was just to stay alive .  the city was on fire smoke was everywhere  the air was scorching hot  from certain vantage points you could even see the leaping flames dancing along the rooftops so obviously it wasn t a good idea to try to go back there .  in the aftermath of the eclipse  once the chaos within his mind had begun to clear a little  he had simply continued downhill from the campus until he found himself entering the forest .  many others plainly had done the same thing .  some of them looked like university people  others were probably remnants of the mob that had come out to storm the observatory on the night of the eclipse  and the rest  theremon guessed  were suburbanites driven from their homes when the fires began to break out .  everyone he saw appeared to be at least as unsettled mentally as he was .  most seemed very much worse off some of them completely unhinged  totally unable to cope .  they had not formed any sort of coherent bands .  mainly they were solitaries  moving on mysterious private tracks through the woods  or else groups of two or three  the biggest aggregation theremon saw was eight people  who from their appearance and dress seemed all to be members of one family .  it was horrifying to encounter the truly crazy ones  the vacant eyes  the drooling lips  the slack jaws  the smeared clothing .  they plodded through the forest glades like the walking dead  talking to themselves  singing  occasionally dropping to their hands and knees to dig up clumps of sod and munch on them .  they were everywhere .  the place was like one vast insane asylum  theremon thought .  probably the whole world was .  those of this sort  the ones who had been most affected by the coming of the stars  were generally harmless  at least to others .  they were too badly deranged to have any interest in being violent  and their bodily coordination was so seriously disrupted that effective violence was impossible for them  anyway .  but there were others who were not quite so mad who at a glance might seem almost normal who posed very serious dangers indeed .  these  theremon quickly realized  fell into two categories .  the first consisted of people who bore no one any ill will but who were hysterically obsessed with the possibility that the darkness and the stars might return .  these were the fire lighters .  very likely they were people who had led orderly  settled lives before the catastrophe family folk  hard workers  pleasant cheerful neighbors .  so long as onos was in the sky they were perfectly calm  but the moment the primary sun began to sink in the west and evening approached  fear of darkness overcame them  and they looked around desperately for something to burn .  anything .  anything at all .  two or three of the other suns might still be overhead when onos set  but the light of the minor suns did not seem sufficient to soothe the raging dread of darkness that these people felt .  these were the ones who had burned their own city down around themselves .  who  in their desperation  had ignited books  papers  furniture  the roofs of houses .  now  driven into the forest by the holocaust in the city  they were trying to burn that down too .  but that was a harder job .  the forest was densely wooded  lush  its thick cover of trees well supplied by the myriad streams that flowed into the broad river running along its border .  pulling down green boughs and trying to set them afire did not provide very satisfactory blazes .  as for the carpet of dead wood and fallen leaves that lay on the forest floor  it had been pretty well soaked by the recent rains .  such of it that was capable of being burned was quickly found and used for bonfires  without touching off any sort of general conflagration  and by the second day the supply of such debris was very sparse .  so the fire lighter people  hampered as they were by forest conditions and by their own shock muddled minds  were having little success so far .  but they had managed to start a couple of good sized fires in the forest all the same  which fortunately had burned themselves out in a few hours because they had consumed all the fuel in their vicinity .  a few days of hot  dry weather  though  and these people might well be able to set the whole place ablaze  as they had already done in saro city .  the second group of not quite stable people roaming the forest seemed to theremon to be a more immediate menace .  these were the ones who had let all social restraints fall away from them .  they were the banditti  the hooligans  the cutthroats  the psychopaths  the homicidal maniacs  the ones who moved like unsheathed blades along the quiet forest pathways  striking whenever they pleased  taking whatever they wanted  killing anyone unlucky enough to arouse their irritation .  since everyone had a certain glazed look in his eyes  some merely from fatigue  others from despondency  and others from madness  you could never be sure  whenever you met someone in the forest  how dangerous he was .  there was no way of telling at a quick glance whether the person approaching you was merely one of the distraught or bewildered crazies  and therefore basically harmless  or one of the kind who were full of lethal fury and attacked anyone they encountered  with neither rhyme nor reason behind their deeds .  so you quickly learned to be on your guard against anyone who came prancing and swaggering through the woods .  any stranger at all could be a menace .  you might be talking quite amiably with someone  comparing notes on your experiences since the evening of nightfall  when abruptly he would take offense at some casual remark of yours  or decide that he admired some article of your clothing  or perhaps merely take a blind unreasoning dislike of your face and  with an animal like howl  he would come rushing at you in mindless ferocity .  some of this sort  no doubt  had been criminals to begin with .  the sight of society collapsing all around them had freed them of all restraint .  but others  theremon suspected  had been placid enough folk until their minds were shattered by the stars .  then  suddenly  they found all the inhibitions of civilized life fall away from them .  they forgot the rules that made civilized life possible .  they were like small children again  asocial  concerned only with their own needs but they had the strength of adults and the will power of the deeply disturbed .  the thing to do  if you hoped to survive  was to avoid those whom you knew to be lethally crazy  or suspected of it .  the thing to pray for was that they would all kill each other off within the first few days  leaving the world safe for the less predatory .  theremon had three encounters with madmen of this terrifying breed in the first two days .  the first one  a tall  rangy man with a weird diabolical grin who was cavorting by the side of a brook that theremon wanted to cross  demanded that the newspaperman pay him a toll to go past .   your shoes  let s say .  or how about that wristwatch .    how about getting out of my way .   theremon suggested  and the man went berserk .  snatching up a cudgel that theremon hadn t noticed until that moment  he roared some sort of war cry and charged .  there was no time to take evasive action  the best theremon could do was duck as the other man swung the cudgel with horrific force at his head .  he heard the club go whirring by  missing him by inches .  it hit the tree beside him instead  cracking into it with tremendous force a force so great that the impact of it traveled up the attacker s arm  and he gasped in pain as the cudgel fell from his nerveless fingers .  theremon was on top of him in an instant  seizing the man s injured arm  bringing it sharply upward with merciless force  making him grunt in agony and double up and fall moaning to his knees .  theremon prodded and pushed him down until his face was in the stream  and held him there .  and held him there .  and held him there .  how simple it would be  theremon thought in wonder  just to go on holding his head under water until he drowned .  a part of his mind was actually arguing in favor of it .  he would have killed you without even thinking about it .  get rid of him .  otherwise what will you do once you let go of him .  fight him all over again .  what  f he follows you through the forest to get even with you .  drown him now  theremon .  drown him .  it was a powerful temptation .  but only one segment of theremon s mind was willing to adapt so readily to the world s new jungle morality .  the rest of him recoiled at the idea  and finally he released the man s arm and stepped back .  he picked up the fallen cudgel and waited .  all the fight was gone from the other man now  though .  choking and gasping  he rose from the stream with water flowing from his mouth and nostrils  and sat trembling by the bank  shivering  coughing  struggling for breath .  he stared sullenly and fearfully at theremon  but he made no attempt to get up  let alone to renew the fighting .  theremon stepped around him  crossed the stream in a bound  and trotted off quickly  deeper into the forest .  the implications of what he had almost done did not fully strike him for another ten minutes .  then he halted suddenly  in a burst of sweat and nausea  and was swept by a fierce attack of vomiting that racked him so savagely that it was a long while before he could rise .  later that afternoon he realized that his roamings had brought him right to the border of the forest .  when he looked out between the trees he saw a highway utterly deserted  and  on the far side of the road  the ruins of a tall brick building standing in a broad plaza .  he recognized the building .  it was the pantheon  the cathedral of all the gods .  there wasn t much left of it .  he walked across the road and stared in disbelief .  it looked as if a fire had started in the heart of the building what had they been doing  using the pews for kindling .  and had swept right up the narrow tower over the altar  igniting the wooden beams .  the whole tower had toppled  bringing down the walls .  bricks were strewn everywhere about the plaza .  he saw bodies jutting out of the wreckage .  theremon had never been a particularly religious man .  he didn t know anyone who was .  like everyone else  he said things like  my god .   or  gods .   or  great gods .   for emphasis  but the idea that there might actually be a god  or gods  or whatever the current prevailing belief system asserted  had always been irrelevant to the way he lived his life .  religion seemed like something medieval to him  quaint and archaic .  now and then he would find himself in a church to attend the wedding of a friend who was as much of a disbeliever as he was  of course or else he went to cover some official rite as a news item but he hadn t been inside any kind of holy building for religious purposes since his own confirmation  when he was ten years old .  all the same  the sight of the ruined cathedral stirred him profoundly .  he had been present at its dedication  a dozen years back  when he was a young reporter .  he knew how many millions of credits the building had cost  he had marveled at the splendid works of art it contained  he had been moved by the marvelous music of ghissimal s hymn to the gods as it resounded through the great hall .  even he  who had no belief in the sacred  could not help feeling that if there was any place on kalgash where the gods truly were present  it must be here .  and the gods had let the building be destroyed like this .  the gods had sent the stars  knowing that the madness to follow would wreck even their own pantheon .  what did that mean .  what did that say about the unknowability and unfathomability of the gods assuming they even existed .  no one would ever rebuild this cathedral  theremon knew .  nothing would ever be as it was .   help me   a voice called .  that feeble sound cut into theremon s meditations .  he looked around .   over here .  here .   to his left .  yes .  theremon saw the glint of golden vestments in the sunlight .  a man half buried in the rubble  far along down the side of the building one of the priests  apparently  judging by his rich garb .  he was pinned below the waist by a heavy beam and was gesturing with what must be the last of his strength .  theremon started to go toward him .  but before he could take more than a dozen steps a second figure appeared at the far end of the fallen building and came running forward  a lean  agile little man who went scrambling over the bricks with animal swiftness  heading for the trapped priest .  good  theremon thought .  together we ought to be able to pull that beam off him .  but when he was still some twenty feet away he halted  horror stricken .  the agile little man had already reached the priest .  bending over him  he had slit the priest s throat with one quick stroke of a small knife  as casually as one might open an envelope  and now he was busily engaged in slicing the cords that fastened the priest s rich vestments .  he looked up  glaring  at theremon .  his eyes were fiery and appalling .   mine   he growled  like a jungle beast .   mine .   and he flourished the knife .  theremon shivered .  for a long moment he stood frozen in his tracks  fascinated in a ghastly way by the efficient manner with which the looter was stripping the dead priest s body .  then  sadly  he turned and hurried away  back across the road  into the forest .  there was no point in doing anything else .  that evening  when tano and sitha and dovim held the sky with their melancholy light  theremon allowed himself a few hours of fragmentary sleep in a deep thicket  but he awoke again and again  imagining that some madman with a knife was creeping up on him to steal his shoes .  sleep left him long before onos rise .  it seemed almost surprising to find himself still alive when morning finally came .  half a day later he had his third encounter with one of the new breed of killers .  this time he was crossing a grassy meadow close by one of the arms of the river when he caught sight of two men sitting in a shady patch just across the way  playing some sort of game with dice .  they looked calm and peaceful enough .  but as theremon came nearer  he realized that an argument had broken out  and then  unthinkably swiftly  one of the men snatched up a bread knife sitting on a blanket beside him and plunged it with lethal force into the other man s chest .  the one who had wielded the knife smiled across at theremon .   he cheated me .  you know how it is .  it makes you damned angry .  i can t stand it when a guy tries to cheat me .   it seemed all very clear cut to him .  he grinned and rattled the dice .   hey  you want to play .   theremon stared into the eyes of madness .   sorry   he said  as casually as he could .   i m looking for my girlfriend .   he kept on walking .   hey  you can find her later .  come on and play .    i think i see her   theremon called  moving faster  and got out of there without looking back .  after that he was less cavalier about wandering through the forest .  he found a sheltered nook in what seemed like a relatively unoccupied glade and built a tidy little nest for himself under a jutting overhang .  there was a berry bush nearby that was heavily laden with edible red fruits  and when he shook the tree just opposite his shelter it showered him with round yellow nuts that contained a tasty dark kernel .  he studied the small stream just beyond  wondering if it contained anything edible that he might catch  but there seemed to be nothing in it except tiny minnows  and he realized that even if he could catch them he would have to eat them raw  for he had nothing to use as fuel for a fire and no way of lighting one  besides .  living on berries and nuts wasn t theremon s idea of high style  but he could tolerate it for a few days .  already his waistline was shrinking commendably  the only admirable side effect of the whole calamity .  best to stay hidden away back here until things calmed down .  he was pretty sure that things would calm down .  general sanity was bound to return  sooner or later .  or so he hoped  at least .  he knew that he himself had come a long way back from the early moments of chaos that the sight of the stars had induced in his brain .  every day that went by  he felt more stable  more capable of coping .  it seemed to him that he was almost his old self again  still a little shaky  perhaps  a little jumpy  but that was only to be expected .  at least he felt fundamentally sane .  he realized that very likely he had had less of a jolt during nightfall than most people  that he was more resilient  more tough minded  better able to withstand the fearful impact of that shattering experience .  but maybe everybody else would start recovering  too  even those who had been much more deeply affected than he had been  and it would be safe to emerge and see what  if anything  was being done about trying to put the world back together .  the thing to do now  he told himself  was to lay low  to keep from getting yourself murdered by one of those psychopaths running around out there .  let them all do each other in  as fast as they could  and then he would come warily creeping out to find out what was going on .  it wasn t a particularly courageous plan .  but it seemed like a wise one .  he wondered what had happened to the others who had been in the observatory with him at the moment of darkness .  to beenay  to sheerin  to athor .  to siferra .  especially to siferra .  from time to time theremon thought of venturing out to look for her .  it was an appealing idea .  during his long hours of solitude he spun glowing fantasies for himself of what it would be like to hook up with her somewhere in this forest .  the two of them  journeying together through this transformed and frightening world  forming an alliance of mutual protection  he had been attracted to her from the first  of course .  for all the good that had done him  he might just as well not have bothered  he knew  handsome as she was  she seemed to be the sort of woman who was absolutely self contained  in no need whatever of any man s company  or any woman s  for that matter .  he had maneuvered her into going out with him now and then  but she had efficiently and serenely kept him at a safe distance all the time .  theremon was experienced enough in worldly things to understand that no amount of smooth talk was persuasive enough to break through barriers that were so determinedly maintained .  he had long ago decided that no worthwhile woman could ever be seduced  you could present the possibility to them  but you had to leave it ultimately to them to do the seducing for you  and if they weren t so minded  there was very little you could do to change their outlook .  and with siferra  things had been sliding in the wrong direction for him all year long .  she had turned on him ferociously and with some justification  he thought ruefully once he began his misguided campaign of mockery against athor and the observatory group .  somehow right at the end he had felt that she was weakening  that she was becoming interested in him despite herself why else had she invited him to the observatory  against athor s heated orders  on the evening of the eclipse .  for a short time that evening there actually had seemed to be real contact blossoming between them but then had come the darkness  the stars  the mob  the chaos after that everything had plunged into confusion but if he could find her somehow  now  we d work well together  he thought we d be a tremendous team hard nosed  competent  survival oriented .  whatever kind of civilization is going to evolve  we d find a good place for ourselves in it .  and if there had been a little psychological barrier between them before  he was certain it would seem unimportant to her now .  it was a brand new world  and new attitudes were necessary if you were going to survive .  but how could he find siferra no communications circuits were open  so far as he knew .  she was just one of millions of people at large in the area .  the forest alone probably had a population of many thousands now  and he had no real reason for assuming that she was in the forest .  she could be fifty miles from here by this time .  she could be dead .  looking for her was a hopeless task  it was worse than trying to find the proverbial needle in a haystack .  this haystack was several counties wide  and the needle might well be getting farther away every hour .  only by the wildest sort of coincidence could he ever locate siferra  or  for that matter  anyone else he knew .  the more theremon thought about his chances of finding her  though  the less impossible the task seemed .  and after a while it began to seem quite possible indeed .  perhaps his steadily rising optimism was a by product of his new secluded life .  he had nothing to do but spend hours each day sitting by the brook  watching the minnows go by and thinking .  and as he endlessly reevaluated things  finding siferra went from seeming impossible to merely unlikely  and from unlikely to difficult  and from difficult to challenging  and from challenging to feasible  and from feasible to readily achievable .  all he had to do  he told himself  was get back out into the forest and recruit a little help from those who were reasonably functional .  tell them who he was trying to find  and what she looked like .  spread the word around .  employ some of his journalistic skills .  and make use of his status as a local celebrity .   i m theremon       he would say .   you know  from the chronicle .  help me and i ll make it worth your while .  you want your name in the paper .  you want me to make you famous .  i can do it .  never mind that the paper isn t being published just now .  sooner or later it ll be back  and i ll be right there with it  and you ll see yourself smack in the middle of the front page .  you can count on that .  just help me find this woman that i m looking for  and    theremon .   a familiar voice  high pitched  cheerful .  he stopped short  squinted into the brightness of the midday sunlight cutting through the trees  peered this way and that to locate the speaker .  he had been walking for two hours  looking for people who would be glad to get out there and spread the word on behalf of the famous theremon     of the saro city chronicle .  but so far he had found only six people altogether .  two of them had taken to their heels the moment they saw him .  a third sat where he was  singing softly to his bare toes .  another  crouching in the fork of a tree  methodically rubbed two kitchen knives together with maniacal zeal .  the remaining two had simply stared at him when he told them what he wanted  one did not seem to understand at all  and the other burst into gales of wild laughter .  not much hope of help from any of them .  and now it appeared that someone had found him .   theremon .  over here .  over here  theremon .  here i am .  don t you see me  man .  over here .    theremon glanced to his left  into a clump of bushes with huge prickly parasol shaped leaves .  at first he saw nothing unusual .  then the leaves swayed and parted  and a plump  roundish man stepped out into view .   sheerin .   he said  amazed .   well  at least you re not so far gone that you ve forgotten my name .   the psychologist had lost some weight  and he was incongruously dressed in overalls and a torn pullover .  a hatchet with a chipped blade was dangling casually from his left hand .  that was perhaps the most incongruous thing of all  sheerin carrying a hatchet .  it wouldn t have been very much stranger to see him walking around with a second head or an extra pair of arms .  sheerin said   how are you  theremon .  great gods  you re all rags and tatters  and it hasn t even been a week .  but i suppose i m not much better .   he looked down at himself .   have you ever seen me this skinny .  a diet of leaves and berries really slims you down  doesn t it .    you ve got a way to go before i d call you skinny   theremon said .   but you do look trim .  how did you find me .    by not looking for you .  it s the only way  when everything s become completely random .  i ve been to the sanctuary  but no one was there .  now i m on my way south to amgando park .  i was just ambling along the path that cuts across the middle of the forest  and there you were .   the psychologist came bounding forward  holding out his hand .   by all the gods  theremon  it s a joy to see a friendly face again .   you are friendly  aren t you .  you re not homicidal .    i don t think i am .    there are more crazies per square yard in here than i ve ever seen in my life  and i ve seen plenty of crazies  let me tell you .   sheerin shook his head and sighed .   gods .  i never dreamed it would be this bad .  even with all my professional experience .  i thought it would be bad  yes  very bad  but not this bad .    you predicted universal madness   theremon reminded him .   i was there .  i heard you say it .  you predicted the complete breakdown of civilization .    it s one thing to predict it .  it s something else again to be right in the middle of it .  it s a very humbling thing  theremon  for an academic like me to find his abstract theories turning into concrete reality .  i was so glib  so blithely unconcerned .   tomorrow there won t be a city standing unharmed in all kalgash   i said  and it was all just so many words to me  really  just a philosophical exercise  completely abstract .   the end of the world you used to live in .   yes .  yes .   sheerin shivered .   and it all happened  just like i said .  but i suppose i didn t really believe my own dire predictions  until everything came crashing down around me .    the stars   theremon said .   you never really took the stars into account .  they were the thing that did the real damage .  maybe we could have withstood the darkness  most of us  just felt a little shaken up  a little bit upset .  but the stars the stars    how bad was it for you .    pretty bad  at first .  i m better now .  and you .    i hid away in the observatory basement during the worst of it .  i was hardly affected at all .  when i came out the next day  the whole observatory was wrecked .  you can t imagine the carnage all over the place .   theremon said   damn folimun .  the apostles    they poured fuel on the fire  yes .  but the fire would have happened anyway .    what about the observatory people .  athor  beenay  and the rest .  siferra    i didn t see any of them .  but i didn t find their bodies  either  while i was looking around the place .  maybe they escaped .  the only person i came across was yimot do you remember him .  one of the graduate students  the very tall awkward one .  he had hidden himself too .   sheerin s face darkened .   we traveled together for a couple of days afterward  until he was killed .    killed .    by a little girl  ten  twelve years old .  with a knife .  a very sweet child .  came right up to him  laughed  stabbed him without warning .  and ran away  still laughing .    gods .    the gods aren t listening any more  theremon .  if they ever were .    i suppose not .   where have you been living  sheerin .   his look was vague .   here .  there .  i went back to my apartment first  but the whole building complex had been burned out .  just a shell  nothing salvageable at all .  i slept there that evening  right in the middle of the ruins .  yimot was with me .  the next day we set out for the sanctuary  but there wasn t any way of getting there from where we were .  the road was blocked there were fires everywhere .  and where it wasn t still burning  there were mountains of rubble that you couldn t get past .  it looked like a war zone .  so we doubled back south into the forest  figuring we d circle around by way of arboretum road and try to reach the sanctuary that way .  that was when yimot was killed .  the forest must be where all the most disturbed ones went .    it s where everyone went   theremon said .   the forest is harder to set fire to than the city is .   did i hear you tell me that when you finally did get to the sanctuary you found it deserted .    that s right .  i reached it yesterday afternoon  and it was wide open .  the outer gate and the inner gate too  and the sanctuary door itself unlocked .  everyone gone .  a note from beenay was tacked up in front .    beenay .  then he made it to the sanctuary safely .    apparently he did   said sheerin .   a day or two before i did  i suppose .  what his note said was that everybody had decided to evacuate the sanctuary and head for amgando park  where some people from the southern districts are trying to set up a temporary government .  by the time he got to the sanctuary there was no one there but my niece raissta  who must have been waiting for him .  now they ve gone to amgando also .  and i m heading there myself .  my friend liliath was in the sanctuary  you know .  i assume she s on her way to amgando with the others .    it sounds nutty   theremon said .   they were as safe in the sanctuary as they could have been anywhere .  why the deuce would they want to come out into all of this insane chaos and try to march hundreds of miles down to amgando .    i don t know .  but they must have had a good reason .  in any case  we have no choice  do we  you and i .  everybody who s still sane is gathering there .  we can stay here and wait for somebody to slice us up the way that nightmarish little girl did to yimot or we can take our chances trying to get to amgando .  here we re doomed  sooner or later  inevitably .  if we can make it to amgando we ll be all right .    have you heard anything about siferra .   theremon asked .   nothing .  why .    i d like to find her .    she may have gone to amgando too .  if she met up with beenay somewhere along the way  he would have told her where everybody is going  and    do you have any reason to think that might have happened .    it s only a guess .   theremon said   my guess is that she s still somewhere around here .  i want to try to track her down .    but the odds against that    you found me  didn t you .    purely by accident .  the chances that you d be able to locate her the same way    are pretty good   theremon said .   or so i prefer to believe .  i m going to attempt it  anyway .  i can always hope to get to amgando later on .  with siferra .   sheerin gave him an odd look  but said nothing .  theremon said   you think i m crazy .  well  maybe i am .    i didn t say that .  but i think you re risking your neck for nothing .  this place is turning into a prehistoric jungle .  it s become absolute savagery here  and not getting any better as the days go along  from what i ve seen .  come south with me  theremon .  we can be out of here in two or three hours  and the road to amgando is just    i mean to look for siferra first   said theremon obstinately .   forget her .    i don t intend to do that .  i m going to stay here and search for her .   sheerin shrugged .   stay  then .  i m clearing out .  i saw yimot cut down by a little girl  remember  right before my eyes  no more than two hundred yards from here .  this place is too dangerous for me .    and you think going on a hike of three or four hundred miles all by yourself isn t dangerous .   the psychologist hefted his hatchet .   i ve got this  if i need it .   theremon fought back laughter .  sheerin was so absurdly mild mannered that the thought of him defending himself with a hatchet was impossible to take seriously .  he said  after a moment   lots of luck .    you really intend to stay .    until i find siferra .   sheerin stared sadly at him .   keep the luck you just offered me  then .  i think you ll need it more than i will .   he turned and trudged away without another word .   for three days or perhaps it was four  the time went by like a blur siferra moved southward through the forest .  she had no plan except to stay alive .  there was no point even in trying to get back to her apartment .  the city still seemed to be burning .  a low curtain of smoke hung in the air wherever she looked  and occasionally she saw a sinuous tongue of red flame licking into the sky on the horizon .  it appeared to her as if new fires were being started every day .  which meant that the craziness had not yet begun to abate .  she could feel her own mind returning gradually to normal  clearing day by day  blessedly emerging into clarity as though she were awakening from some terrible fever .  she was uncomfortably aware that she wasn t fully herself yet managing any sequence of thoughts was a laborious thing for her  and she lost herself quickly in muddle .  but she was on her way back  of that she was sure .  apparently many of the others around her in the forest weren t recovering at all .  though siferra was trying to keep to herself as much as she could  she encountered people from time to time  and most of them looked pretty badly deranged  sobbing  moaning  laughing wildly  glaring weirdly  rolling over and over on the ground .  just as sheerin had suggested  some had suffered such mental trauma during the time of the crisis that they might never be sane again .  huge segments of the population must have lapsed into barbarism or worse  siferra realized .  they must be setting fires for the sheer fun of it now .  or killing for the same reason .  so she moved carefully .  with no particular destination in mind  she drifted more or less southward across the forest  camping wherever she found fresh water .  the club that she had picked up on the evening of the eclipse was never very far from her hand .  she ate whatever she could find that looked edible seeds  nuts  fruits  even leaves and bark .  it wasn t much of a diet .  she knew that she was strong enough physically to endure a week or so on such improvised rations  but after that she d begin to suffer .  already she could feel what little extra weight she had been carrying dropping away  and her physical resilience beginning little by little to diminish .  and the supply of berries and fruits was diminishing too  very rapidly  as the forest s thousands of hungry new inhabitants picked it over .  then  on what she believed was the fourth day  siferra remembered about the sanctuary .  her cheeks flamed as she realized that there had been no need for her to have been living this cave woman life all week .  of course .  how could she have been so stupid .  just a few miles from here at this very moment  hundreds of university people were tucked away safe and sound in the old particle accelerator lab  drinking bottled water and dining pleasantly on the canned foods that they had spent the last few months stashing away .  how ridiculous to be skulking around in this forest full of madmen  scratching in the dirt for her meager meals and looking hungrily at the little forest creatures that cavorted beyond her reach on the branches of the trees .  she would go to the sanctuary .  somehow there would be a way to get them to take her in .  it was a measure of the extent to which the stars had disrupted her mind  she told herself  that it had taken her as long as this to remember that the sanctuary was there .  too bad  she thought  that the idea hadn t occurred to her earlier .  she realized now that she had spent the last few days traveling in precisely the wrong direction .  directly ahead of her now lay the steep chain of hills that marked the southern boundary of the forest .  looking up  she could see the blackened remains of the posh onos heights real estate development along the summit of the hill that rose like a dark wall before her .  the sanctuary  if she remembered correctly  was the opposite way entirely  midway between the campus and saro city on the highway running along the north side of the forest .  it took her another day and a half to make her way back through the forest to the north side .  in the course of the journey she had to use her club twice to fight off attackers .  she had three non violent but edgy staring matches with young men sizing her up to decide whether she could be jumped .  and once she blundered into a sheltered copse where five gaunt wildeyed men with knives were stalking one another in a circle  like dancers moving in some strange archaic ritual .  she got away from there as fast as she could .  finally she saw the wide highway that was university road ahead of her  just beyond the forest boundary .  somewhere along the north side of that road was the unobtrusive little country lane that led to the sanctuary .  yes  there it was .  hidden  insignificant  bordered on both sides by untidy clumps of weeds and thick grass that had gone to seed .  it was late afternoon .  onos was almost gone from the sky  and the hard baleful light of tano and sitha cast sharp shadows across the land that gave the day a wintry look  though the air was mild .  the little red eye that was dovim moved through the northern heavens  still very distant  still very high .  siferra wondered what had become of the unseeable kalgash two .  evidently it had done its terrible work and moved on .  by this time it might be a million miles out in space  curving away from the world on its long orbit  riding on and on through the airless dark  not to return for another two thousand and forty nine years .  which would be at least two million years too soon  thought siferra bitterly .  a sign appeared before her   private property no trespassing by order of board of proctors  saro university  and then a second sign  in vivid scarlet        .  .  .  danger  .  .  .  high energy research facility no entry  good .  she must be going the right way  then .  siferra had never been to the sanctuary  even in the days when it had still been a physics laboratory  but she knew what to expect  a series of gates  and then some sort of scanner post that would monitor anyone who had managed to get this far .  within minutes she had come to the first gate .  it was a doublehinged screen of tightly woven metal mesh  rising to perhaps twice her height  with a formidable looking barbed wire fence stretching off at either end and disappearing into the brambled underbrush that grew uncontrolledly here .  the gate was ajar .  she studied it  puzzled .  some illusion .  some trick of her muddled mind .  no .  no  the gate was open  all right .  and it was the correct gate .  she saw the university security symbol on it .  but why was it open .  there was no indication that it had been forced .  troubled now  she went through .  the road inward was nothing more than a dirt track  deeply rutted and cratered .  she followed along its edge  and in a little while she saw an inner barrier  no mere barbed wire fence here but a solid concrete wall  blank  impregnable looking .  it was broken only by a gateway of dark metal  with a scanner mounted above it .  and this gate was open too .  stranger and stranger .  what about all the vaunted protection that was supposed to have sealed the sanctuary away from the general madness that had overtaken the world .  she stepped inside .  everything was very quiet here .  ahead of her lay some scruffy looking wooden sheds and barns .  perhaps the sanctuary entrance itself the mouth of an underground tunnel  siferra knew lay behind them .  she walked around the outbuildings .  yes  there was the sanctuary entrance  an oval door in the ground  with a dark passageway behind it .  and there were people  too  a dozen or so of them  standing in front of it  watching her with chilly  unpleasant curiosity .  they all had strips of bright green cloth tied about their throats  as a kind of neckerchief .  she didn t recognize any of them .  so far as she could tell  they weren t university people .  a small bonfire was burning just to the left of the door .  beside it was a pile of chopped logs  elaborately stacked  every piece of wood very neatly arranged according to size with astonishing precision and care .  it looked more like some sort of meticulous architect s model than like a woodpile .  a sickening sense of fear and disorientation swept over her .  what was this place .  was it really the sanctuary .  who were these people .   stay right where you are   said the man at the front of the group .  he spoke quietly  but there was whip snapping authority in his tone .   put your hands in the air .   he held a small sleek needle gun in his hand .  it was pointing straight at her midsection .  siferra obeyed without a word .  he appeared to be about fifty years old  a strong  commanding figure  almost certainly the leader here .  his clothing looked costly and his manner was poised and confident .  the green neckerchief he wore had the sheen of fine silk .   who are you .   he asked calmly  keeping the weapon trained on her .   siferra     professor of archaeology  saro university .    that s nice .  are you planning to do any archaeology around here  professor .   the others laughed as though he had said something very  very funny .  siferra said   i m trying to find the university sanctuary .  can you tell me where it is .    i think this might have been it   the man replied .   the university people all cleared out of here a few days back .  this is fire patrol headquarters now .   tell me  are you carrying any combustibles  professor .    combustibles .    matches  lighter  a pocket generator  anything that could be used to start a fire .   she shook her head .   not any of those things .    fire starting s prohibited under article one of the emergency code .  if you re in violation of article one the punishment is severe .   siferra stared at him blankly .  what was he talking about .  a thin  sallow faced man standing beside the leader said   i don t trust her  altinol .  it was those professors that started all this .  two to one she s got something hidden away in her clothes  out of sight somewhere .    i have no fire making equipment anywhere on me   siferra said  irritated .  altinol nodded .   perhaps .  perhaps not .  we won t take the chance  professor .  strip .   she stared at him  startled .   what did you say .    strip .  remove your clothes .  demonstrate that you have no concealed illegal devices anywhere on your person .   siferra hefted her club  rubbing her hand uneasily along its shaft .  blinking in astonishment  she said   hold on  here .  you can t be serious .    article two of the emergency code  fire patrol may take any precaution deemed necessary to prevent unauthorized firestarting .  article three  this may include immediate and summary execution of those who resist fire patrol authority .  strip  professor  and do it quickly .    delete this  he gestured with the needle gun .  it was a very serious looking gesture .  but still she stared at him  still she made no move to remove her garments .   who are you .  what s this fire patrol stuff all about .    citizen vigilantes  professor .  we re attempting to restore law and order in saro after the breakdown .  the city s been pretty much destroyed  you know .  or maybe you don t .  the fires are continuing to spread  and there s no functioning fire department to do anything about it any more .  and maybe you haven t noticed  but the whole province is full of crazy people who think we haven t quite had enough fires yet as it is  so they re starting even more .  that can t go on .  we intend to stop the starters by any means available .  you are under suspicion of possessing combustibles .  the accusation has been placed and you have sixty seconds to clear yourself of the charge .  if i were you  i d start getting my clothes off  professor .   siferra could see him silently counting off the seconds .  strip  in front of a dozen strangers .  a red haze of fury surged through her at the thought of the indignity .  most of these people were men .  they weren t even bothering to hide their impatience .  this wasn t any sort of security precaution  despite altinol s solemn citing of an emergency code .  they just wanted to see what her body looked like  and they had the power to make her submit .  it was intolerable .  but then  after a moment  she found her indignation beginning to slip away .  what did it matter .  siferra asked herself wearily .  the world had ended .  modesty was a luxury that only civilized people indulged in  and civilization was an obsolete concept .  in any case this was a blunt order  at gunpoint .  she had wandered into a remote  isolated place far down a country road .  no one was going to come to her rescue here .  the clock was ticking .  and altinol didn t seem to be bluffing .  it wasn t worth dying just for the sake of concealing her body from them .  she tossed her club to the ground .  then  in cold anger but without permitting herself to make any outward show of rage  she began methodically to peel away her garments and drop them down beside it .   my underwear too .   she asked sardonically .   everything .    does it look as if i ve got a lighter hidden in here .    you ve got twenty seconds left  professor .   siferra glowered at him and finished undressing without another word .  it was surprisingly easy  now that she had done it  to stand naked in front of these strangers .  she didn t care .  that was the essential thing that came with the end of the world  she realized .  she didn t care .  she pulled herself up to her full imposing height and stood there  almost defiantly revealed  waiting to see what they d do next .  altinol s eyes traveled over her body in an easy  self assured way .  somehow she found herself not even caring about that .  a kind of burned out indifference had come over her .   very nice  professor   he said finally .   thank you .   her tone was icy .   may i cover myself now .   he waved grandly .   of course .  sorry for the inconvenience .  but we had to be absolutely sure .   he slipped the needle gun into a band at his waist and stood with his arms folded  casually watching her as she dressed .  then he said   you must think you ve fallen in among savages  isn t that so  professor .    does what i think really interest you .    you ll notice that we didn t leer or drool or wet our clothes while you were ah demonstrating that you had no concealed fire making apparatus .  nor did anyone attempt to molest you in any way .    that was extremely kind .   altinol said   i point these things out  even though i realize it s not likely to make much difference to you while you re still this angry at us  because i want you to know that what you ve stumbled across here may in fact be the last remaining bastion of civilization in this godforsaken world .  i don t know where our beloved governmental leaders have disappeared to  and i certainly don t consider our cherished brethren of the apostles of flame to be in any way civilized  and your university friends who used to be hidden out here have picked up and gone away .  just about everybody else seems to be clear out of his mind .  except  that is  for you and us  professor .    how flattering of you to include me .    i never flatter anybody .  you give an appearance of having withstood the darkness and the stars and the breakdown better than most .  what i want to know is whether you re interested in staying here and becoming part of our group .  we need people like you  professor .    what does that mean .  scrub floors for you .  cook soup .   altinol seemed impervious to her sarcasms .   i mean helping in the struggle to keep civilization alive  professor .  not to sound too high pitched about it  but we see ourselves as having a holy mission .  day after day we are making our way through that madhouse out there  disarming the crazies  taking the firemaking apparatus away from them  reserving to ourselves exclusively the right to light fires .  we can t put out the fires that are already burning  at least not yet  but we can do our best to keep new ones from being lit .  that s our mission  professor .  we are taking control of the concept of fire .  it s the first step toward making the world fit to live in again .  you seem sane enough to join us and therefore i invite you in .  what do you say  professor .  do you want to be part of the fire patrol .  or would you rather try your luck back there in the forest .    the morning was misty and cool .  thick swirls of fog blew through the ruined streets  fog so heavy that sheerin was unable to tell which suns were in the sky .  onos  certainly somewhere .  but its golden light was diffused and almost completely concealed by the fog .  and that patch of slightly brighter sky off to the southwest very likely indicated the presence of one of the pairs of twin suns  but whether they were sitha and tano or patru and trey he had no way of discerning .  he was very tired .  it was already abundantly clear to him that his notion of making his way alone and on foot across the hundreds of miles between saro city and amgando national park was an absurd fantasy .  damn theremon .  together  at least  they might have stood a chance .  but the newspaperman had been unshakable in his confidence that he would somehow find siferra in the forest .  talk about fantasy .  talk about absurdity .  sheerin stared ahead  peering through the fog .  he needed a place to rest for a while .  he needed to find something fit to eat  and perhaps a change of clothing  or at least a way of bathing himself .  he had never been this filthy in his life .  or as hungry .  or as weary .  or as despondent .  through the whole long episode of the coming of the darkness  from the first moment that he had heard from beenay and athor that such a thing was likely  sheerin had bounced around from one end of the psychological spectrum to the other  from pessimism to optimism and back again  from hope to despair to hope .  his intelligence and experience told him one thing  his naturally resilient personality told him another .  perhaps beenay and athor were wrong and the astronomical cataclysm wouldn t happen at all .  no  the cataclysm will definitely happen .  darkness  despite his own disturbing experiences with it at the tunnel of mystery two years before  would turn out not to be such a troublesome thing after all  if indeed it did come .  wrong .  darkness will cause universal madness .  the madness would be only temporary  a brief period of disorientation .  the madness will be permanent  in most people .  the world would be disrupted for a few hours and then go back to normal .  the world will be destroyed in the chaos following the eclipse .  back and forth  back and forth  up and down  up and down .  twin sheerins  locked in endless debate .  but now he had hit the bottom of the cycle and he seemed to be staying there  unmoving and miserable .  his resilience and optimism had evaporated in the glare of what he had seen during his wanderings these past few days .  it would be decades  possibly even a century or more  before things returned to normal .  the mental trauma had scored too deep a scar  the destruction that had already occurred to the fabric of society was too widespread .  the world he had loved had been vanquished by darkness and smashed beyond repair .  that was his professional opinion and he could see no reason to doubt it .  this was the third day  now  since sheerin had parted from theremon in the forest and gone marching off  in his usual jaunty fashion  toward amgando .  that jauntiness was hard to recapture now .  he had managed to get out of the forest in one piece there had been a couple of bad moments  times when he had had to wave his hatchet around and look menacing and lethal  a total bluff on his part  but it had worked and for the last day or so he had been moving in a plodding way through the once pleasant southern suburbs .  everything was burned out around here .  entire neighborhoods had been destroyed and abandoned .  many of the buildings were still smoldering .  the main highway running to the southern provinces  sheerin had believed  began just a few miles below the park a couple of minutes  drive  if you were driving .  but he wasn t driving .  he had had to make the horrendous climb up out of the forest to the imposing hill that was onos heights practically on hands and knees  clawing his way through the underbrush .  it took him half a day just to ascend those few hundred yards .  once he was on top  sheerin saw that the hill was more like a plateau but it stretched on endlessly before him  and though he walked and walked and walked he did not come to the highway .  was he going the right way .  yes .  yes  from time to time he saw a road sign at a street corner that told him he was indeed heading toward the great southern highway .  how far was it  though .  the signs didn t say .  every ten or twelve blocks there was another sign  that was all .  he kept going .  he had no choice .  but reaching the highway was only the first step in getting to amgando .  he would still be in saro city  essentially  at that point .  then what .  keep on walking .  what else .  he could hardly hitch a ride with someone .  no vehicles seemed to be running anywhere .  the public fuel stations must have gone dry days ago  those that had not been burned .  how long was it likely to take him  at this pace  to get down to amgando on foot .  weeks .  months .  no it would take him forever .  he d be dead of starvation long before he came anywhere near the place .  even so  he had to go on .  without a sense of purpose  he was finished right now  and he knew it .  something like a week had passed since the eclipse  maybe more .  he was beginning to lose track of time .  he neither ate regularly nor slept regularly any more  and sheerin had always been a man of the most punctual habits .  suns came and went in the sky  now  the light brightened or dimmed  the air grew warmer or grew cooler  and time passed  but without the progression of breakfast  lunch  dinner  sleep  sheerin had no idea of bow it was passing .  he knew only that he was rapidly running out of strength .  he hadn t eaten properly since the coming of the nightfall .  from that dark moment onward  it had been scraps and shards for him  nothing more a bit of fruit from some tree when he could find it  any unripe seeds that didn t look as though they d be poisonous  blades of grass  anything .  it wasn t making him sick  somehow  but it wasn t sustaining him very well  either .  the nutritional content must have been close to zero .  his clothes  worn and tattered  hung from him like a shroud .  he didn t dare look underneath them .  he imagined that his skin must lie now in loose folds over his jutting bones .  his throat was dry all the time  his tongue seemed swollen  there was a frightful pounding behind his eyes .  and that dull  numb  hollow sensation in his gut  all the time .  well  he told himself in his more cheerful moments  there must have been some reason why he had devoted himself so assiduously for so many years to building up such an opulent layer of fat  and now he was learning what that reason was .  but his cheerful moments were fewer and farther between every day .  hunger was preying on his spirits .  and he realized that he couldn t hold out much longer like this .  his body was big  it was accustomed to regular feedings  and robust ones  he could live only so long on his accumulated backlog of sheerin  and then he would be too weak to pull himself onward .  before long it would seem simpler just to curl up behind some bush and rest  .   .   .  and rest  .   .   .  and rest .   .   .  he had to find food .  soon .  the neighborhood he was moving through now  though deserted like all the rest  seemed a little less devastated than the areas behind him .  there had been fires here too  but not everywhere  and the flames appeared to have jumped randomly past this house and that without harming them .  patiently sheerin went from one to the next  trying the door of each house that didn t seem to have been seriously damaged .  locked .  every one of them .  how fastidious of these people .  he thought .  how tidy .  the world has fallen in around their ears  and they are abandoning their homes in blind terror  running off to the forest  the campus  the city  the gods only knew where and they take the trouble to lock their houses before they go .  as if they mean simply to have a brief holiday during the time of chaos  and then go home to their books and their bric a brac  their closets full of nice clothing  their gardens  their patios .  or hadn t they realized that everything was over  that the chaos was going to go on and on and on .  perhaps  sheerin thought dismally  they aren t gone at all .  they re in there hiding behind those locked doors of theirs  huddling in the basement the way i did  waiting for things to get normal again .  or else staring at me from the upstairs windows  hoping i ll go away .  he tried another door .  another .  another .  all locked .  no response .   hey .  anybody home .  let me in .   silence .  he stared bleakly at the thick wooden door in front of him .  he envisioned the treasures behind it  the food not yet spoiled and waiting to be eaten  the bathtub  the soft bed .  and here he was outside  with no way of getting in .  he felt a little like the small boy in the fable who has been given the magic key to the garden of the gods  where fountains of honey flow and gumdrops grow on every bush  but who is too small to reach up and put it in the keyhole .  he felt like crying .  he realized  then  that he was carrying a hatchet .  and he began to laugh .  hunger must have been making him simpleminded .  the little boy in the fable perseveres  offering his mittens and his boots and his velvet cap to various animals who are passing by so that they will help him  each one gets on another one s back  and he climbs on the top of the heap and puts the key in the keyhole .  and here was not so little sheerin  staring at a locked door  and he was holding a hatchet .  break the door down .  just break it down .  it went against everything that he thought was right and proper .  sheerin looked at the hatchet as though it had turned to a serpent in his hand .  breaking in why  that was burglary .  how could he  sheerin      professor of psychology at saro university  simply smash down the door of some law abiding citizen s house and casually help himself to whatever he found there .  easily  he told himself  laughing even harder at his own foolishness .  this is how you do it .  he swung the hatchet .  but it wasn t all that easy .  his starvation weakened muscles rebelled at the effort .  he could lift the hatchet  all right  and he could swing it  but the blow seemed pathetically weak  and a line of fire shot through his arms and back as the blade made contact with the stout wooden door .  had he split the door .  no .  cracked it a little .  maybe .  maybe a little chip .  he swung again .  again .  harder .  there you go  sheerin .  you re getting the hang of it now .  swing .  swing .  he scarcely felt the pain  after the first few swings .  he closed his eyes  pulled breath deep into his lungs  and swung .  and swung again .  the door was cracking now .  there was a perceptible crevice .  another swing another maybe five or six more good blows and it would break in half  food .  bath .  bed .  swing .  and swing .  and  and the door opened in his face .  he was so astonished that he nearly fell through .  he staggered and lurched  braced himself with the haft of the ax against the door frame  and looked up .  half a dozen fierce wild eyed faces looked back at him .   you knocked  sir .   a man said  and everyone howled in manic glee .  then they reached out for him  caught him by his arms  pulled him inside .   you won t be needing this   someone said  and effortlessly twisted the hatchet from sheerin s grasp .   you can only hurt yourself with a thing like that  don t you know .   more laughter a crazed howling .  they pushed him into the center of the room and formed a ring around him .  there were seven  eight  maybe nine of them .  men and women both  and one half grown boy .  sheerin could see at a glance that they weren t the rightful residents of this house  which must have been neat and well maintained before they moved into it .  now there were stains on the wall  half the furniture was overturned  there was a sodden puddle of something wine .  on the carpet .  he knew what these people were .  these were squatters  rough and ragged looking  unshaven  unwashed .  they had come drifting in  had taken possession of the place after its owners fled .  one of the men was wearing only a shirt .  one of the women  hardly more than a girl  was clad just in a pair of shorts .  they all had an acrid  repellent odor .  their eyes had that intense  rigid  off center look that he had seen a thousand times in recent days .  you didn t need any clinical experience to know that those were the eyes of the insane .  cutting through the stink of the squatters  bodies  though  was another odor  a much more pleasing one  one that almost drove sheerin out of his mind too  the aroma of cooking food .  they were preparing a meal in the next room .  soup .  stew .  something was boiling in there .  he swayed  dizzied by his own hunger and the sudden hope of soothing it at last .  mildly he said   i didn t know the house was occupied .  but i hope you ll let me stay with you this evening  and then i ll be moving along .    you from the patrol .   a big  heavily bearded man asked suspiciously .  he seemed to be the leader .  sheerin said uncertainly   the patrol .  no  i don t know anything about them .  my name is sheerin      and i m a member of the faculty of    patrol .  patrol .  patrol .   they were chanting suddenly  moving in a circle around him .    saro university   he finished .  it was as though he had uttered a magic spell .  they halted in their tracks as his quiet voice cut through their shrill screaming  and they fell silent  staring at him in a terrifying way .   you say you re from the university .   the leader asked in a strange tone .   that s right .  department of psychology .  i m a teacher and i do a little hospital work on the side .   look  i don t intend to make any trouble for you at all .  i just need a place to rest for a few hours  and a little food  if you can spare it .  just a little .  i haven t eaten since    university .   a woman cried .  the way she said it  it sounded like something filthy  something blasphemous .  sheerin had heard that tone before  from folimun    the night of the eclipse  referring to scientists .  it was a frightening thing to hear .   university .  university .  university .   they began to circle around him again  chanting again  pointing at him  making bizarre signs with their hooked fingers .  he could no longer understand their words .  it was a raucous nightmare chant  nonsense syllables .  were these people some subchapter of the apostles of flame  convening here to practice an arcane rite .  no  he doubted that .  they had a different look  too ragged  too shabby  too demented .  the apostles  such few of them as he had seen  had always appeared crisp  self contained  almost frighteningly controlled .  besides  the apostles hadn t been in evidence since the eclipse .  sheerin supposed that they had all withdrawn to some sanctuary of their own to enjoy the vindication of their beliefs in private .  these people  he thought  were simply unaffiliated wandering crazies .  and it seemed to sheerin that he saw murder in their eyes .   listen   he said   if i ve disturbed some ceremony of yours in any way  i apologize  and i m perfectly willing to leave right now .  i only tried to come in here because i thought the house was empty and i was so hungry .  i didn t mean to    university .  university .   he had never seen a look of such intense hatred as these people were giving him .  but there was fear there too .  they kept back from him  tense  trembling  as if in dread of some terrible power that he might unexpectedly unleash .  sheerin held his hands out to them imploringly .  if only they d stop prancing and chanting for a moment .  the smell of the food cooking in the next room was making him wild .  he caught one of the women by the arm  hoping to halt her long enough to appeal to her for a crust  a bowl of broth  anything .  but she jumped away  hissing as though sheerin had burned her with his touch  and rubbed frantically at the place on her arm where his fingers had briefly rested .   please   he said .   i don t intend any harm .  i m as harmless as anyone there is  believe me .    harmless .   the leader cried  spitting the word out .   you .  you  university .  you re worse than the patrol .  the patrol just makes a little trouble for people .  but you  you destroyed the world .    i what .    be careful  tasibar   a woman said .   get him out of here before he makes a magic on us .    a magic .   sheerin said .   me .   they were pointing at him again  stabbing the air vehemently  terrifyingly .  some had begun to chant under their breaths  a low  fierce chant that had the rhythms of a motor steadily gaining speed and soon to spin out of control .  the girl who wore only a pair of shorts said   it was the university that called down the darkness on us .    and the stars   said the man who wore just a shirt .   they brought the stars .    and this one might bring them back   said the woman who had spoken before .   get him out of here .  get him out of here .   sheerin stared incredulously .  he told himself that he should have been able to predict this .  it was an all too likely development  pathological suspicion of all scientists  all educated people  an unreasoning phobia that must be raging now like a virus among the survivors of the night of terror .   do you think i can bring back the stars with a snap of my fingers .  is that what s frightening you .    you are university   the man called tasibar said .   you knew the secrets .  university brought the darkness  yes .  university brought the stars .  university brought doom .   it was too much .  bad enough to be dragged in here and forced to inhale the maddening flavor of that food without being allowed to have any of it .  but to be blamed for the catastrophe to be looked upon as some sort of malevolent witch by these people  something snapped in sheerin .  derisively he cried   is that what you believe .  you idiots .  you deranged superstitious fools .  blaming the university .  we brought the darkness .  by all the gods  what stupidity .  we were the very ones who tried to warn you .   he gestured angrily  clenching his fists  clashing them furiously together .   he s going to bring them again  tasibar .  he ll make it go dark on us .  stop him .  stop him .   suddenly they were clustering all about him  closing in  reaching for him .  sheerin  standing in their midst  held out his hands helplessly  apologetically  toward them and did not try to move .  he regretted having insulted them just now  not because it had endangered his life they probably hadn t even paid attention to the names he was calling them but because he knew that the way they were was not their fault .  if anything it was his fault  for not having tried harder to help them protect themselves against what he knew was coming .  those articles of theremon s if only he had spoken with the newspaperman  if only he had urged him in time to change his mocking tack  yes  he regretted that now .  he regretted all sorts of things  things both done and undone .  but it was much too late .  someone punched him .  he gasped in surprise and pain .   liliath   he managed to cry .  then they swarmed all over him .   there were four suns in the sky  onos  dovim  patru  trey .  four sun days were supposed to be lucky ones  theremon remembered .  and certainly this one was .  meat .  actual meat at last .  what a glorious sight .  it was food that he had obtained strictly by accident .  but that was all right .  the novel charms of outdoor life had been wearing thinner and thinner for him  the hungrier he got .  by now he d gladly take his meat any way it came  thank you very much .  the forest was full of all sorts of wild animals  most of them small  very few of them dangerous  and all of them impossible to catch at least with your bare hands .  and theremon knew nothing about making traps  nor did he have anything out of which he might have fashioned one .  those children s tales about people lost in the woods who immediately set about adapting to life in the open  and turn instantly into capable hunters and builders of dwelling places  were just that fables .  theremon regarded himself as a reasonably competent man  as city dwellers went  but he knew that he had no more chance of hunting down any of the forest animals than he did of making the municipal power generators start to work again .  and as for building a dwelling place  the best he had been able to do was throw together a simple lean to of branches and twigs  which at least had kept most of the rain away from him on the one stormy day .  but now the weather was warm and lovely again  and he had actual meat for dinner .  the only problem now was cooking it .  he was damned if he was going to eat it raw .  ironic that in a city that had just undergone near total destruction by fire he should be pondering how he was going to go about cooking some meat .  but most of the worst fires had burned themselves out by now  and the rain had taken care of the rest .  and though for a while in the first few days after the catastrophe it had seemed as though new fires were still being lit  that didn t seem to be happening any more .  i ll figure something out  theremon thought .  rub two sticks together and get a spark .  strike metal against stone and set a scrap of cloth ablaze .  some boys on the far side of a lake near the place where he was camped had obligingly killed the animal for him .  of course  they hadn t known they were doing him any favor  most likely they had been planning to eat it themselves  unless they were so unhinged that they were simply chasing the creature for the sake of sport .  somehow he doubted that .  they had been pretty purposeful about it  with a single mindedness that only hunger can inspire .  the beast was a graben one of those ugly long nosed bluish furred things with slithery hairless tails that sometimes could be seen poking around suburban garbage cans after onos had set .  well  beauty wasn t a requirement just now .  the boys had somehow flushed it out of its daytime hiding place and had driven the poor stupid thing into a little dead end box of a canyon .  as theremon watched from the other side of the lake  disgusted and envious at the same time  they chased it tirelessly up and down  pelting it with rocks .  for a dumb scavenger it was remarkably agile  scooting swiftly this way and that in its desperation to elude its attackers .  but finally a lucky shot caromed off its head and killed it instantly .  he had assumed that they would devour it on the spot .  but at that moment a shaggy  shambling figure came into view above them  standing for a moment at the rim of the little canyon  then beginning to climb down toward the lake .   run .  it s garpik the slasher .   one of the boys yelled .   garpik .  garpik .   in an instant the boys scattered  leaving the dead graben behind .  theremon  still watching  had slipped back into the shadows on his side of the lake .  he also knew this garpik  though not by name  one of the most dreaded of the forest dwellers  a squat  almost ape like man who wore nothing but a belt through which an assortment of knives was thrust .  he was a killer without motive  a cheerful psychopath  a pure predator .  garpik stood by the mouth of the canyon for a while  humming to himself  fondling one of his knives .  he didn t seem to notice the dead animal  or didn t care .  perhaps he was waiting for the boys to come back .  but plainly they weren t planning to do that  and after a time garpik  with a shrug  went slouching off into the forest  most likely in search of something amusing to do with his weapons .  theremon waited an endless moment  making certain garpik didn t intend to double back and pounce on him .  then when he could no longer bear the sight of the dead graben lying there on the ground  where some other human or animal predator might suddenly come along to seize it before he did he rushed forward  circled the lake  snatched the animal up  carried it back to his hiding place .  it weighed as much as a small child .  it might be good for two or three meals or more  if he could restrain his hunger and if the meat didn t spoil too quickly .  his head was spinning with hunger .  he had had nothing but fruits and nuts to eat for more days than he could remember .  his skin had drawn tight over his muscles and bones  what little spare fat he had been carrying he had long since absorbed  and now he was consuming his own strength in the struggle to stay alive .  but this evening  at last  he would enjoy a little feast .  roast graben .  what a treat .  he thought bitterly .   and then he thought  be grateful for small mercies  theremon .  let s see to build a fire  now  fuel  first .  behind his shelter was a flat wall of rock with a deep lateral crack in it  in which a line of weeds was growing .  plenty of them were long dead and withered  and had dried out since the last rainstorm .  quickly theremon moved along the rock wall  plucking yellowed stems and leaves  assembling a little heap of straw like material that would catch fire easily .  now some dry twigs .  they were harder to find  but he rummaged around the forest floor  looking for dead shrubs or at least shrubs with dead branches .  the afternoon was well along by the time he had put together enough of that sort of tinder to matter  dovim was gone from the sky  and trey and patru  which had been low on the horizon when the boys were hunting the graben  now had moved into the center of things  like a pair of glittering eyes watching the sorry events on kalgash from far overhead .  carefully theremon arranged his kindling wood above the dried plants  building a framework as he imagined a real outdoorsman would  the bigger branches along the outside  then the thinner ones crisscrossed over the middle .  not without some difficulty  he skewered the graben on a spit he had made of a sharp  reasonably straight stick  and positioned it a short distance above the woodpile .  so far  so good .  just one little thing missing  now .  fire .  he had kept his mind away from that problem while assembling his fuel  hoping that it would solve itself somehow without his having to dwell on it .  but now it had to be faced .  he needed a spark .  the old boys  book trick of rubbing two sticks together was  theremon was certain  nothing but a myth .  he had read that certain primitive tribes had once started their fires by twirling a stick against a board with a little hole in it  but he suspected that the process wasn t all that simple  that it probably took an hour of patient twirling to get anything going .  and in any case very likely you had to be initiated into the art by the old man of the tribe when you were a boy  or some such thing  or it wouldn t work .  two rocks  though was it possible to strike a spark by banging one against the other .  he doubted that too .  but he might as well try it  he thought .  he had no other ideas .  there was a wide flat stone lying nearby  and after a little searching he found a smaller triangular one that could fit conveniently in the palm of his hand .  he knelt beside his little fireplace and began methodically to hit the flat one with the pointed one .  nothing in particular happened .  a hopeless feeling began to grow in him .  here i am  he thought  a grown man who can read and write  who can drive a car  who can even operate a computer  more or less .  i can turn out a newspaper column in two hours that everybody in saro city will want to read  and i can do it day in  day out  for twenty years .  but i can t start a fire in the wilderness .  on the other hand  he thought  i will not eat this graben raw unless i absolutely have to .  will not .  will not .  not .  not .  not .  in fury he struck the stones together  again  again  again .  spark  damn you .  light .  burn .  cook this ridiculous pathetic animal for me .  again .  again .  again .   what are you doing there  mister .   an unfriendly voice asked suddenly from a point just behind his right shoulder .  theremon looked up  startled  dismayed .  the first rule of survival in this forest was that you must never let yourself get so involved in anything that you failed to notice strangers sneaking up on you .  there were five of them .  men  about his own age .  they looked as ragged as anyone else living in the forest .  they didn t seem especially crazy  as people went these days  no glassy eyes  no drooling mouths  only an expression that was grim and weary and determined .  they didn t appear to be carrying any weapons other than clubs  but their attitude was distinctly hostile .  five against one .  all right  he thought  take the damned graben and choke on it .  he wasn t foolish enough to try to put up a fight .   i said   what are you doing there  mister .    the first man repeated  more coldly than before .  theremon glared .   what does it look like .  i m trying to start a fire .    that s what we thought .   the stranger stepped forward .  carefully  deliberately  he aimed a kick into theremon s little woodpile .  the painstakingly assembled kindling wood went scattering  and the skewered graben toppled to the ground .   hey  wait a second  .    no fires here  mister .  that s the law .   brusquely  firmly  bluntly .   possession of fire making equipment is prohibited .  this wood is to use for a fire .  that s obvious .  and you admit guilt besides .    guilt .   theremon said  incredulously .   you said you were making a fire .  these stones  they seem to be fire making equipment  right .  the law s clear on that .  prohibited .   at a signal from the leaders  two of the others came forward .  one grabbed theremon about the neck and chest from behind  and the other took the two stones he had been using from his hands and hurled them into the lake .  they splashed and disappeared .  theremon  watching them go  felt the way he imagined beenay must have felt at seeing his telescopes smashed by the mob .   let go of me   theremon muttered  struggling .   let go of him   said the leader .  he dug his foot into theremon s fire site again  grinding the bits of straw and stems into the dirt .    fires aren t allowed any more   he said to theremon .   we ve had all the fires we re ever going to have .  we can t permit no more fires on account of the risk  the suffering  the damage  don t you know that .  you try to build another fire  we re going to come back and smash your head in  you hear me .    it was fire that ruined the world   one of the others said .   fire that drove us from our homes .    fire is the enemy .  fire is forbidden .  fire is evil .   theremon stared .  fire evil .  fire forbidden .  so they were crazy after all .   the penalty for trying to start a fire  first offense   the first man said   is a fine .  we fine you this animal here .  to teach you not to endanger innocent people .  take it  listigon .  it s a good lesson to him .  the next time this fellow catches something  he ll remember that he oughtn t try to conjure up the enemy just because he feels like having some cooked meat .    no .   theremon cried in a half strangled voice  as listigon bent to pick up the graben .   that s mine  you morons .  mine .  mine .   and he charged wildly at them  all caution swept away by exasperation and frustration .  someone hit him  hard  in the midsection .  he gasped and gagged and doubled over  clutching his belly with his arms  and someone else hit him from behind  a blow in the small of the back that nearly sent him tumbling forward on his face .  but this time he jabbed backward sharply with his elbow  felt a satisfying contact  heard a grunt of pain .  he had been in fights before  but not for a long  long time .  and never one against five .  but there was no running away from this one now .  what he had to do  he told himself  was stay on his feet and keep on backpedaling until he was up against the rock wall  where at least they couldn t come at him from the rear .  and then just try to hold them off  kicking and punching and if necessary biting and roaring  until they decided to let him be .  a voice somewhere deep within him said  they  re completely nuts .  they  re perfectly likely to keep this up until they beat you to death .  nothing he could do about that now  though .  except try to hold them off .  he kept his head down and punched as hard as he could  while steadily pushing onward toward the wall .  they crowded around him  battering him from all sides .  but he stayed on his feet .  their numerical advantage wasn t as overwhelming as he had expected .  in these close quarters  the five of them were unable all to get at him at once  and theremon was able to play the confusion to his own benefit  striking out in any direction and moving as quickly as he could while they lumbered around trying to avoid hitting each other .  even so  he knew he couldn t take much more .  his lip was cut and one eye was starting to swell  and he was getting short of breath .  one more good punch could send him down .  he held one arm in front of his face and struck with the other  while continuing to back toward the shelter of the rock wall .  he kicked someone .  there was a howl and a curse .  someone else kicked back .  theremon took it on his thigh and swung around  hissing in pain .  he swayed .  he struggled desperately for air .  it was hard to see  hard to tell what was going on .  they were all around him now  fists flailing at him from all sides .  he wasn t going to reach the wall .  he wasn t going to stay on his feet much longer .  he was going to fall  and they were going to trample him  and he was going to die  going to  die  then he became aware of confusion within the confusion  the shouts of different voices  new people mingling in the melee  a host of figures everywhere .  fine  he thought .  another bunch of crazies joining the fun .  but maybe i can slip away somehow while all this is going on   in the name of the fire patrol  stop .   a woman s voice called  clear  loud  commanding .   that s an order .  stop  all of you .  get away from him .  now .   theremon blinked and rubbed his forehead .  he looked around  bleary eyed .  there were four newcomers in the clearing .  they seemed fresh and crisp  and were wearing clean clothes .  flowing green neckerchiefs were tied about their throats .  they were carrying needle guns .  the woman she appeared to be in charge made a quick imperative gesture with the weapon she held  and the five men who had attacked theremon moved away from him and went obediently to stand in front of her .  she glowered sternly at them .  theremon stared in disbelief .   what s all this about .   she asked the leader of the five in a steely tone .   he was starting a fire trying to he was going to roast an animal  but we came along    all right .  i see no fire here .  the laws have been maintained .  clear off .   the man nodded .  he reached down to take the graben .   hey .  that belongs to me   theremon said hoarsely .   no   the other said .   you have to lose it .  we fined you for breaking the fire laws .    i ll decide the punishment   the woman said .   leave the animal and clear off .  clear off .    but    clear off  or i ll have you up on charges before altinol .  get .  get .   the five men went slinking away .  theremon continued to stare .  the woman wearing the green neckerchief came toward him .   i guess i was just in time  wasn t i  theremon .    siferra   he said in amazement .   siferra .    he was hurting in a hundred places .  he wasn t at all sure how intact his bones were .  one of his eyes was practically swollen shut .  but he suspected he was going to survive .  he sat leaning against the rock wall  waiting for the haze of pain to diminish a little .  siferra said   we ve got a little jonglor brandy back at our headquarters .  i can authorize you to have some  i guess .  for medicinal purposes  of course .    brandy .  headquarters .  what headquarters .  what is this all about  siferra .  are you really here at all .    you think i m a hallucination .   she laughed and dug her fingertips lightly into his forearm .   is that a hallucination  would you say .   he winced .   careful .  i m pretty tender there .  and everywhere else  right now .   you just dropped right down out of the sky  is that it .    i was on patrol duty  passing through the forest  and we heard the sounds of a scuffle .  so we came to investigate .  i had no idea you were mixed up in it until i saw you .  we re trying to restore order around here somehow .    we .    the fire patrol .  it s as close as there is to a new local government .  the headquarters is at the university sanctuary  and a man named altinol who used to be some sort of company executive is in charge .  i m one of his officers .  it s a vigilante group  really  which has managed to put across the notion that the use of fire must be controlled  and that only members of the fire patrol have the privilege of   theremon raised his hand .   hold on  siferra .  slow down  will you .  the university people in the sanctuary have formed a vigilante group  you say .  they re going around putting out fires .  how can that be .  sheerin told me that they had all cleared out  that they had gone south to some sort of rendezvous at amgando national park .    sheerin .  is he here .    he was .  he s on his way to amgando now .  i decided to stick around here a little while longer .   it seemed impossible to tell her that he had stuck around on the unlikely chance that he would manage to find her .  siferra nodded .   what sheerin told you was true .  all the university people left the sanctuary the day after the eclipse .  i suppose they re off in amgando by now i haven t heard anything about them .  they left the sanctuary wide open  and altinol and his bunch wandered in and took possession of it .  the fire patrol has fifteen  twenty members  all of them in pretty good shape  mentally .  they ve been able to establish their authority over about half the area of the forest  and some of the surrounding territory of the city where people are still living .    and you .   theremon asked .   how did you get involved with them .    i went into the forest first  once the stars were gone .  but it looked pretty dangerous here  so when i remembered about the sanctuary  i headed there .  altinol and his people were already there .  they invited me to join the patrol .   siferra smiled in what might have been a rueful way .   they didn t really offer me much of a choice   she said .   they aren t particularly gentle sorts .    these aren t gentle times .    no .  so i decided  better off with them than drifting around on my own .  they gave me this green neckerchief everybody around here respects it .  and this needle gun .  people respect that too .    so you re a vigilante   theremon said  musing .   somehow i never figured you for that kind of thing .    i never did either .    but you believe that this altinol and his fire patrol are righteous folk who are helping to restore law and order  is that it .   she smiled again  and again it was not an expression of mirth .   righteous folk .  they think they are  yes .    you don t .   a shrug .   they re out for themselves first  and no kidding about that .  there s a power vacuum here and they mean to fill it .  but i suppose they re not the worst possible people to try to impose a governmental structure right now .  they re easier to take than some of the outfits i can think of  at least .    you mean the apostles .  are they trying to form a government too .    very likely they are .  but i haven t heard anything about them since it all happened .  altinol thinks that they re still hidden away underground somewhere  or that mondior has led them off to some place far out in the country where they ll set up their own kingdom .  but we ve got a couple of new fanatic groups that are real lulus  theremon .  you just had a run in with one of them  and it s only by wild luck that they didn t finish you off .  they believe that the only salvation for humanity now is to give up the use of fire completely  since fire has been the ruin of the world .  so they re going around destroying fire making equipment wherever they can find it  and killing anyone who seems to enjoy starting fires .    i was simply trying to cook some dinner for myself   said theremon somberly .  siferra said   it s all the same to them whether you re cooking a meal or amusing yourself with a little bit of arson .  fire is fire  and they abhor it .  lucky thing for you that we came along in time .  they accept the authority of the fire patrol .  we re the elite  you understand  the only ones whose use of fire will be tolerated .    it helps to have needle guns   theremon said .   that gets you a lot of toleration too .   he rubbed a sore place on his arm and looked off bleakly into the distance .    there are other fanatics besides these  you say .    there are the ones who think the university astronomers had discovered the secret of making the stars appear .  they blame athor  beenay   co .  for everything that s happened .  it s the old hatred of the intellectual that crops up whenever medieval emotions start surfacing .    gods .  are there many like that .    enough .  darkness only knows what they ll do if they actually catch any university people who haven t already reached amgando safely .  string them up to the nearest lamppost  i suppose .   morosely theremon said   and i d be responsible .    you .    everything that s happened is my fault  siferra .  not athor s  not folimun s  not the gods   but mine .  mine .  me  theremon     .  that time you called me irresponsible  you were being too easy with me .  i wasn t just irresponsible  i was criminally negligent .    theremon  stop it .  what s the good of   he swept right on .   i should have been writing columns day in and day out  warning of what was coming  crying out for a crash program to build shelters  to set aside provisions and emergency generating equipment  to provide counseling for the disturbed  to do a million different things and instead what did i do .  sneered .  poked fun at the astronomers in their lofty tower .  made it politically impossible for anybody in the government to take athor seriously .    theremon    you should have let those crazies beat me to death  siferra .   her eyes met his .  she looked angry .   don t talk like a fool .  all the government planning in the world wouldn t have changed anything .  i wish you hadn t written those articles too  theremon .  you know how i felt about them .  but what does any of that matter now .  you were sincere in what you felt .  you were wrong  but you were sincere .  and in any case there s no sense speculating about what might have been .  what we have to deal with now is what is .   more gently she said   enough of this .  are you able to walk .  we need to get you back to the sanctuary .  a chance to wash up  some fresh clothes  a little food in you    food .    the university people left plenty of provisions behind .   theremon chuckled and pointed to the graben .   you mean i don t have to eat that .    not unless you really want to .  i suggest you give it to someone who needs it more than you do  while we re on our way out of the forest .    good idea .   he pulled himself to his feet  slowly and painfully .  gods  the way everything was hurting .  an experimental step or two  not bad  not bad .  nothing seemed to be broken after all .  just a little bit misused .  the thought of a warm bath and actual substantial food was healing his bruised and aching body already .  he took a last look around at his little flung together lean to  his stream  his scruffy little bushes and weeds .  his home  these strange few days .  he wouldn t miss it much  but he doubted that he d forget his life here very soon  either .  then he picked up the graben and slung it over his shoulder .   lead the way   he said to siferra .  they had not gone more than a hundred yards when theremon caught sight of a group of boys skulking behind the trees .  they were the same ones  he realized  who had flushed the graben from its burrow and hunted it to its death .  evidently they had come back to search for it .  now  sullenly  they were staring from a distance  obviously annoyed that theremon was walking off with their prize .  but they were too intimidated by the green neckerchiefs of office that identified the fire patrol group or  more likely  simply by their needle guns to stake a claim to it .   hey .   theremon called .   this is yours  isn t it .  i ve been taking care of it for you .   he flung the carcass of the graben toward them .  it fell to the ground well short of the place where they were  and they hung back  looking mystified and uneasy .  they were obviously eager to have the animal but afraid to come forward .   there s life in the post nightfall era for you   he said sadly to siferra .   they re starving  but they don t dare make a move .  they think it s a trap .  they figure that if they step out from those trees to get the animal we ll shoot them down  just for fun .   siferra said   who can blame them .  everyone s afraid of everyone  now .  leave it there .  they ll go after it when we re out of sight .   he followed her onward  limping as he went .  siferra and the other patrol people moved confidently through the forest  as though invulnerable to the dangers that were lurking everywhere .  and indeed there were no incidents as the group headed as rapidly as theremon s injuries permitted toward the road that ran through the woods .  it was interesting to see  he thought  how quickly society was beginning to reconstitute itself .  in just a few days an irregular outfit like this fire patrol had begun to take on a kind of governmental authority .  unless it was just the needle guns and the general air of self assurance that kept the crazies away  of course .  they came to the edge of the forest  finally .  the air was growing cooler and the light was uncomfortably dim  now that patru and trey were the only suns in the sky .  in the past theremon had never been bothered by the relatively low light levels that were typical of the hours when the only illumination came from one of the double sun pairs .  ever since the eclipse  though  such a two sun evening had seemed disturbing and threatening to him  a possible harbinger although he knew it could not be so of the imminent return of darkness .  the psychic wounds of nightfall would be a long time healing  even for the world s sturdiest minds .   the sanctuary is just a little way down this road   siferra said .   how re you doing .    i m all right   said theremon sourly .   they didn t cripple me  you know .   but it was a considerable struggle to force his sore  throbbing legs to carry him along .  he was intensely gladdened and relieved when at last he found himself at the cave like entrance to the underground domain that was the sanctuary .  the place was like a maze .  caverns and corridors led off in all directions .  vaguely in the distance he saw the intricate loops and coils of scientific looking gear  mysterious and unfathomable  running along the walls and ceiling .  this place  he remembered now  had been the site of the university s atom smasher until the big new experimental lab at saro heights opened .  apparently the physicists had left a good deal of obsolete equipment behind .  a tall man appeared  radiating authority .  siferra said   this is altinol     .  altinol  i want you to meet theremon     .    of the chronicle .   altinol said .  he didn t sound awed or in any way impressed  he seemed merely to be registering the fact out loud .   formerly   said theremon .  they eyed each other without warmth .  altinol  theremon thought  looked to be a very tough cookie indeed  a man in early middle age  obviously trim and in prime condition .  he was well dressed in sturdy clothing and carried himself with the air of someone who was accustomed to being obeyed .  theremon  studying him  riffled quickly through the well stocked files of his memory and after a moment was pleased to strike a chord of recognition .  he said   morthaine industries .  that altinol .   a momentary flicker of amusement .  or was it annoyance .   appeared in altinol s eyes .   that one  yes .    they always said you wanted to be prime executive .  well  it looks like you are  now .  of what s left of saro city  at least  if not the whole federal republic .    one thing at a time   altinol said .  his voice was measured .   first we try to stumble back out of anarchy .  then we think about putting the country together again and worry about who s going to be prime executive .  we have the problem of the apostles  for example  who have seized control of the entire north side of the city and the territory beyond  and placed it under religious authority .  they won t be easy to displace .   altinol smiled coolly .   first things first  my friend .    and for theremon   siferra said   the first thing is a bath  and then a meal .  he s been living in the forest since nightfall .   come with me   she said to him .  partitions had been set up all along the old particle accelerator track  carving it up into a long series of little rooms .  siferra showed him to one in which copper pipes mounted overhead carried water to a porcelain tank .   it won t be really warm   she warned him .   we only run the boilers a couple of hours a day  because the fuel supply is so low .  but it s bound to be better than bathing in a chilly forest stream .   you knew something about altinol .    chairman of morthaine industries  the big shipping combine .  he was in the news a year or two back  something about wangling a contract by possibly irregular means to develop a huge real estate tract on government land in nibro province .    what does a shipping combine have to do with real estate development .   siferra asked .   that s exactly the point .  nothing at all .  he was accused of using improper government influence something about offering lifetime passes on his cruise line to senators  i think   theremon shrugged .   makes no difference now  really .  there s no more morthaine industries  no more real estate developing to be done  no federal senators to bribe .  he probably didn t like my recognizing him .    he probably didn t care .  running the fire patrol is all that matters to him now .    for the time being   said theremon .   today the saro city fire patrol  tomorrow the world .  you heard him talking about displacing the apostles who ve grabbed the far side of the city .  well  someone s got to do it .  and he s the kind who enjoys running things .   siferra went out .  theremon lowered himself into the porcelain tank .  not exactly sybaritic .  but pretty wonderful  after all he had been through lately .  he leaned back and closed his eyes and relaxed .  and luxuriated .  siferra took him to the sanctuary dining hall  a simple tin roofed chamber  when he was finished with his bath  and left him there by himself  telling him she had to make her day s report to altinol .  a meal was waiting for him there one of the packaged dinners that had been stockpiled here in the months that the sanctuary was being set up .  lukewarm vegetables  tepid meat of some unknown kind  a pale green non alcoholic drink of nondescript flavor .  it all tasted wondrously delicious to theremon .  he forced himself to eat slowly  carefully  knowing that his body was unaccustomed to real food after his time in the forest  every mouthful had to be thoroughly chewed or he d get sick  he knew  though his instinct was to bolt it as fast as he could and ask for a second helping .  after he had eaten theremon sat back  staring dully at the ugly tin wall .  he wasn t hungry any more .  and his frame of mind was beginning to change for the worse .  despite the bath  despite the meal  despite the comfort of knowing he was safe in this well defended sanctuary  he found himself slipping into a mood of the deepest desolation .  he felt very weary .  and dispirited  and full of gloom .  it had been a pretty good world  he thought .  not perfect  far from it  but good enough .  most people had been reasonably happy  most were prosperous  there was progress being made on all fronts toward deeper scientific understanding  toward greater economic expansion  toward stronger global cooperation .  the concept of war had come to seem quaintly medieval and the age old religious bigotries were mostly obsolete  or so it had seemed to him .  and now it was all gone  in one short span of hours  in a single burst of horrifying darkness .  a new world would be born from the ashes of the old  of course .  it was always that way  siferra s excavations at thombo testified to that .  but what sort of world would it be .  theremon wondered .  the answer to that was already at hand .  it would be a world in which people killed other people for a scrap of meat  or because they had violated a superstition about fire  or simply because killing seemed like a diverting thing to do .  a world in which the altinols came forward to take advantage of the chaos and gain power for themselves .  a world in which the folimuns and mondiors  no doubt  were scheming to emerge as the dictators of thought probably working hand in hand with the altinols  theremon thought morbidly .  a world in which  no .  he shook his head .  what was the point of all this dark  brooding lamentation .  siferra had the right notion  he told himself .  there was no sense in speculating about what might have been .  what we have to deal with is what is .  at least he was alive  and his mind was pretty much whole again  and he had come through his ordeal in the forest more or less intact  aside from a few bruises and cuts that would heal in a couple of days .  despair was a useless emotion now  it was a luxury that he couldn t allow himself  any more than siferra would allow herself the luxury of still being angry at him over the newspaper pieces he had written .  what was done was done .  now it was time to pick up and move onward  regroup  rebuild  make a fresh start .  to look back was folly .  to look forward in dismay or despondency was mere cowardice .   finished .   siferra said  returning to the dining hall .   i know  not magnificent food .  but it beats eating graben .    i couldn t say .  i never actually got to eat any graben .    you probably didn t miss much .  come  i ll show you to your room .   it was a low ceilinged cubicle of no great elegance  a bed with a godlight on the floor beside it  a washstand  a single dangling light fixture .  scattered in one corner were some books and newspapers that must have been left behind by those who had occupied this room on the evening of the eclipse .  theremon saw a copy of the chronicle opened to the page of his column  and winced  it was one of his last pieces  a particularly intemperate onslaught on athor and his group .  he reddened and pushed it out of sight with his foot .  siferra said   what are you going to do now  theremon .    do .    i mean  once you ve had a chance to rest up a little .    i haven t given it much thought .  why .    altinol wants to know if you re planning to join the fire patrol   she said .   is that an invitation .    he s willing to take you aboard .  you re the kind of person that he needs  someone strong  someone capable of dealing with people .    yes   theremon said .   i d be good here  wouldn t i .    but he s uneasy about one thing .  there s room for only one boss in the patrol  and that s altinol .  if you joined up  he d want you to understand right from the beginning that what altinol says goes  without any argument .  he s not sure how good you are at taking orders .    i m not so sure how good i am at that either   theremon said .   but i can see altinol s point of view .    will you join  then .  i know there are problems with the whole patrol setup .  but at least it s a force for order  and we need something like that now .  and altinol may be highhanded  but he s not evil .  i m convinced of that .  he simply thinks the times call for strong measures and decisive leadership .  which he s capable of supplying .    i don t doubt that he is .    think it over this evening   siferra said .   if you want to join  talk to him tomorrow .  be frank with him .  he ll be frank with you  you can be certain of that .  so long as you can assure him that you re not going to be any direct threat to his authority  i m certain that you and he    no   theremon said suddenly .   no what .   he was silent for a time .  at length he said   i don t need to spend the evening thinking about it .  i already know what my answer will be .   siferra looked at him  waiting .  theremon said   i don t want to butt heads with altinol .  i know the kind of man he is  and i m very sure that i can t get along with people like that for any length of time .  and i also know that in the short run it may be necessary to have operations like the fire patrol  but in the long run they re a bad thing  and once they re established and institutionalized it s very hard to get rid of them .  the altinols of this world don t give up power voluntarily .  little dictators never do .  and i don t want the knowledge that i helped put him on top hanging around my neck for the rest of my life .  reinventing the feudal system doesn t strike me as a useful solution for the problems we have now .  so it s no go  siferra .  i m not going to wear altinol s green neckerchief .  there isn t any future for me here .   quietly siferra said   what are you going to do  then .    sheerin told me that there s a real provisional government being formed at amgando park .  university people  maybe some people from the old government  representatives from all over the country coming together down there .  as soon as i m strong enough to travel  i m going to head for amgando .   she regarded him steadily .  she made no reply .  theremon took a deep breath .  and said  after a moment   come with me to amgando park  siferra .   he reached a hand toward her .  softly he said   stay with me this evening  in this miserable little tiny room of mine .  and in the morning let s clear out of here and go down south together .  you don t belong here any more than i do .  and we stand five times as much chance of getting to amgando together than we would if either of us tried to make the journey alone .   siferra remained silent .  he did not withdraw his hand .   well .  what do you say .   theremon watched the play of conflicting emotions moving across her features .  but he did not dare try to interpret them .  clearly siferra was struggling with herself .  but then  abruptly  the struggle came to an end .   yes   she said at last .   yes .  let s do it  theremon .   and moved toward him .  and took his hand .  and switched off the dangling overhead light  though the soft glow of the godlight beside the bed remained .    do you know the name of this neighborhood .   siferra asked .  she stared  numbed  dismayed  at the charred and ghastly landscape of ruined houses and abandoned vehicles that they had entered .  it was a little before midday  the third day of their flight from the sanctuary .  the unsparing light of onos mercilessly illuminated every blackened wall  every shattered window .  theremon shook his head .   it was called something silly  you can be sure of that .  golden acres  or saro estates  or something like that .  but what it was called isn t important now .  this isn t a neighborhood any more .  what we have here used to be real estate  siferra  but these days what it is is archaeology .  one of the lost suburbs of saro .   they had reached a point well south of the forest  almost to the outskirts of the suburban belt that constituted the southern fringes of saro city .  beyond lay agricultural ones  small towns  and somewhere far in the distance  unthinkably far  their goal of amgando national park .  the crossing of the forest had taken them two days .  they had slept the first evening at theremon s old lean to  and the second one in a thicket halfway up the rugged slope leading to onos heights .  in all this while they had had no indication that the fire patrol was on their trail .  altinol had apparently made no attempt to pursue them  even though they had taken weapons with them and two bulging backpacks of provisions .  and surely  siferra thought  they were beyond his reach by now .  she said   the great southern highway ought to be somewhere around here  shouldn t it .    another two or three miles .  if we re lucky there won t be any fires burning to block us from going forward .    we ll be lucky .  count on it .   he laughed .   always the optimist  eh .    it doesn t cost any more than pessimism   she said .   one way or another  we ll get through .    right .  one way or another .   they were moving steadily along .  theremon seemed to be making a quick recovery from the beating he had received in the forest  and from his days of virtual starvation .  there was an amazing resilience about him .  strong as she was  siferra had to work hard to keep up with his pace .  she was working hard  too  to keep her own spirits up .  from the moment of setting out  she had consistently struck a hopeful note  always confident  always certain that they d make it safely through to amgando and that they would find people like themselves already hard at work there at the job of planning the reconstruction of the world .  but inwardly siferra wasn t so sure .  and the farther she and theremon went into these once pleasant suburban regions  the more difficult it was to fight back horror  shock  despair  a sense of total defeat .  it was a nightmare world .  there was no escaping the enormity of it .  everywhere you turned you saw destruction .  look .  she thought .  look .  the desolation the scars the fallen buildings  the walls already overrun by the first weeds  occupied already by the early platoons of lizards .  everywhere the marks of that terrible night when the gods had once more sent their curse against the world .  the awful acrid smell of black smoke rising from the remains of fires that the recent rains had extinguished the other smoke  white and piercing  curling upward out of basements still ablaze the stains on everything the bodies in the streets  twisted in their final agonies the look of madness in the eyes of those few lingering living people who now and then peered out from the remains of their homes  all glory vanished .  all greatness gone .  everything in ruins  everything as if the ocean had risen  she thought  and swept all our achievements into oblivion .  siferra was no stranger to ruins .  she had spent her whole professional life digging in them .  but the ruins she had excavated were ancient ones  time mellowed and mysterious and romantic .  what she saw here now was all to immediate  all too painful to behold  and there was nothing at all romantic about it .  she had been able readily enough to come to terms with the downfall of the lost civilizations of the past  it carried little emotional charge for her .  but now it was her own epoch that had been swept into the discard bin of history  and that was hard to bear .  why had it happened .  she asked herself .  why .  why .  why .  were we so evil .  had we strayed so far from the path of the gods that we needed to be punished this way .  no .  no .  there are no gods  there was no punishment .  of that much  siferra was still certain .  she had no doubt that this was simply the working of blind fate  brought about by the impersonal movements of inanimate and uncaring worlds and suns  drawing together every two thousand years in dispassionate coincidence .  that was all .  an accident .  an accident that kalgash had been forced to endure over and over again during its history .  from time to time the stars would appear in all their frightful majesty  and in a desperate terror kindled agony  man would unknowingly turn his hand against his own works .  driven mad by the darkness  driven mad by the ferocious light of the stars .  it was an unending cycle .  the ashes of thombo had told the whole tale .  and now it was thombo all over again .  just as theremon had said  this place is archaeology now .  exactly .  the world they had known was gone .  but we are still here  she thought .  what shall we do .  what shall we do .  the only comfort she could find amidst the bleakness was the memory of that first evening with theremon  in the sanctuary  so sudden  so unexpected  so wonderful .  she kept going back to it in her mind  over and over .  his oddly shy smile as he asked her to stay with him no sly seductive trick  that .  and the look in his eyes .  and the feel of his hands against her skin  his embrace  his breath mingling with hers  how long it had been since she had been with a man .  she had almost forgotten what it was like almost .  and always  those other times  there had been the uneasy sense of making a mistake  of taking a false path  of committing herself to a journey she should not be taking .  it had not been that way with theremon  simply a dropping of barriers and pretenses and fears  a joyful yielding  an admission  finally  that in this torn and tortured world she must no longer go it alone  that it was necessary to form an alliance  and that theremon  straightforward and blunt and even a little coarse  strong and determined and dependable  was the ally she needed and wanted .  and so she had given herself at last  unhesitatingly and without regret .  what an irony  she thought  that it had taken the end of the world to bring her to the point of falling in love .  but at least she had that .  everything else might be lost  but at least she had that .   look there   she said  pointing .   a highway sign .   it was a shield of green metal  hanging at a crazy angle from a lamppost  its surface blackened by smoke stains .  in three or four places it was punctured by what probably were bulletholes .  but the bright yellow lettering was still reasonably legible  great southern highway  and an arrow instructing them to go straight ahead .   it can t be more than another mile or two from here   theremon said .   we ought to reach it by   there was a sudden high whining sound  and then a twanging crash  reverberating with stunning impact .  siferra covered her ears .  a moment later she felt theremon hooking his arm through hers  pulling her to the ground .   get down .   he whispered harshly .   somebody s firing .    who .  where .   his needle gun was in his hand .  she drew hers also .  glancing up  she saw that the projectile had struck the highway sign  there was a new hole in it between the first two words  obliterating several of the letters .  theremon  crouching  was moving in a quick shuffle toward the edge of the nearest building .  siferra followed him  feeling hideously exposed .  this was worse than standing naked in front of altinol and the fire patrol  a thousand times worse .  the next shot might come at any moment  from any direction  and she had no way to protect herself .  even when she pulled herself around the corner of the building and huddled up against theremon in the alleyway  breathing hard  her heart pounding  she felt no assurance that she was safe .  he nodded toward a row of burned out houses on the other side of the street .  two or three of them were intact  down near the opposite corner  and now she saw grimy shadowy faces peering out of an upstairs window of the farthest one .   people in there .  squatters  i bet .  crazies .    i see them .    not afraid of our patrol neckerchiefs .  maybe the patrol doesn t mean anything to them  this far out of town .  or maybe they were shooting at us because we re wearing them .    you think so .    anything s possible .   theremon edged forward a little way .   what i wonder is  were they trying to hit us and is their aim really lousy  or were they just trying to scare us .  if they tried to shoot at us and the best they could do was hit the highway sign  then we could try making a run for it .  but if it was just a warning    that s what i suspect it was .  a shot that went astray isn t likely to have gone astray right into the highway sign .  that s too neat .    probably so   theremon said .  he scowled .   i think i m going to let them know we re armed .  just to discourage them from trying to send a few scouts sneaking around one of these houses and coming up on us from the rear .   he looked down at his needler  adjusting the aperture to wide beam and maximum distance .  then he raised it and squeezed off a single shot .  a bolt of red light sizzled through the air and struck the ground just in front of the building where the faces had appeared .  an angry charred spot appeared on the lawn  and wisps of smoke came curling up .  siferra asked   do you think they saw that .    unless they re so far gone that they aren t capable of paying attention .  but my guess is that they saw  all right .  and didn t like it much .   the faces were back at the window .   stay down   theremon warned .   they ve got some kind of heavy hunting rifle .  i can see its snout .   there was another whining sound  another tremendous crash .  the highway sign  shattered  fell to the ground .   they may be crazies   siferra said   but their aim is pretty damned good .    too good .  they were just playing with us when they fired that first shot .  laughing at us .  they re telling us that if we show our noses they ll blow us away .  they ve got us pinned down  and they re enjoying it .    can we get out of here down the far end of this alley .    it s all rubble back there .  and more squatters waiting for us on the other side  for all we know .    then what are we going to do .    set that house on fire   theremon said .   burn them out .  and kill them  if they re too crazy to surrender .   her eyes widened .   kill them .    if they give us no other option  yes  yes  i will .  do you want to get to amgando  or would you rather spend the rest of your life hiding out here in this alleyway .    but you can t just kill people  even though you even though they   her voice trailed off .  she didn t know what she was trying to say .   even though they re trying to kill you  siferra .  even though they think it s fun to send a couple of shots whistling past your ears .   she made no reply .  she had thought she was beginning to understand the way things worked in the monstrous new world that had come into being on the evening of the eclipse  but she realized that she understood nothing  nothing at all .  theremon had crept out toward the street a short way once again .  he was aiming his needler .  the incandescent bolt of light struck the white facade of the house down the street .  instantly the wood began to turn black .  little flamelets sprang up .  he drew a line of fire across the front of the building  paused a moment  fired again  tracing a second line across the first .   give me your gun   he said .   mine s overheating .   she passed him the weapon .  he adjusted it and fired a third time .  an entire section of the house s front wall was ablaze now .  theremon was cutting through it  aiming his beam toward the interior of the building .  not very long ago  siferra thought  that white wooden house had belonged to someone .  people had lived there  a family  proud of their house  their neighborhood tending their lawn  watering their plants  playing with their pets  giving dinner parties for their friends  sitting on the patio sipping drinks and watching the suns move through the evening sky .  now none of that meant anything .  now theremon was lying on his belly in an alleyway strewn with ashes and rubble across the way  efficiently and systematically setting that house on fire .  because that was the only way that he and she could get safely out of this street and continue on their way to amgando park .  a nightmare world  yes .  a column of smoke was rising within the house now .  the whole left hand side of its front wall was on fire .  and people were leaping from the second story windows .  three  four  five of them  choking  gasping .  two women  three men .  they dropped down on the lawn and lay there a moment  as though dazed .  their clothes were ragged and dirty  their hair was unkempt .  crazies .  they had been something else  before nightfall  but now they were simply part of that vast horde of wild eyed  uncouth looking drifters whose minds had been unhinged  perhaps forever  by the sudden astounding blast of stunning light that the stars had hurled against their unprepared senses .   stand up .   theremon called to them .   hands in the air .  now .  come on  get  em up .   he stepped out into full view  holding both of the needle guns .  siferra came out beside him .  the house was shrouded in heavy smoke now  and within that dark cloak great frightful gusts of flame were sweeping upward on all sides of the building  blazing like scarlet banners .  were there people still trapped inside .  who could tell .  did it matter .   line up  there .   theremon ordered .   that s it .  face to the left .   they straggled to attention .  one man was a little slow  and theremon sent a needler beam blazing past his cheek to encourage his cooperation .   start running  now .  down the street .  faster .  faster .   one side of the house caved in with a terrible roaring sound  exposing rooms  closets  furniture  like a doll s house that had been cut away .  everything was on fire .  the squatters were almost at the corner now .  theremon continued to shout at them  urging them on  aiming an occasional needle bolt at their heels .  then he turned to siferra .   all right .  let s get out of here .   they holstered their needlers and went running off in the opposite direction  toward the great southern highway .   what if they had come out firing .   siferra asked afterward  when they could see the highway entrance itself just a short distance away and were moving through the open fields that led to it .   would you really have killed them  theremon .   he looked at her in a steady  severe way .   if that was the only way we could have gotten ourselves out of that alleyway .  i thought i gave you my answer to that before .  of course i would .  what choice would i have had .  what else could i have done .    nothing  i suppose   siferra said  her voice barely audible .  the image of the burning house still seared her mind .  and the sight of those ragged  shabby people  running down the street .  but they had fired first  she told herself .  they had started the trouble .  there was no telling how far they would have carried it  if theremon hadn t hit on the idea of burning the house down .  the house somebody s house  nobody s house  she corrected .   there it is   theremon said .   the great southern highway .  it s a nice smooth five hour drive to amgando .  we could be there by dinnertime .    if we only had something to drive   said siferra .   if   he said .   even after all he had seen in the course of having come this far  theremon wasn t prepared for the way the great southern highway looked .  a traffic engineer s worst nightmare would not have been as bad .  everywhere in their crossing of the southern suburbs  theremon and siferra had passed abandoned vehicles in the streets .  no doubt many drivers  overcome by panic at the moment of the emergence of the stars  had stopped their cars and fled from them on foot  hoping to find someplace to hide from the terrifying overpowering brilliance that blazed suddenly from the skies .  but the abandoned cars that littered the streets of these quiet residential sectors of the city through which he and siferra had come so far had been scattered in a sparse random manner  here and there at relatively wide intervals .  in these neighborhoods vehicular traffic must have been fairly light at the time of the eclipse  coming as it had after the end of the regular working day .  the great southern highway  though crowded with late intercity commuters must have become an utter madhouse in the instant when calamity struck the world .   look at it   theremon whispered  awestruck .   will you look at it  siferra .   she shook her head in wonder .   incredible .  incredible .   there were cars everywhere clotted masses of them  piled up everywhere in a chaotic scramble  stacked two or three high in places .  the wide roadway was almost completely blocked by them  an all but impassable wall of wrecked vehicles .  they were facing in every direction .  some were upside down .  many were burned out skeletons .  bright puddles of spilled fuel gleamed like little crystalline lakes .  streaks of pulverized glass gave the roadbed a sinister sheen .  dead cars .  and dead drivers .  it was the most grisly sight they had seen thus far .  a vast army of the dead stretched before them .  there were bodies slumped at the controls of their cars  bodies wedged between vehicles that had collided  bodies pinned beneath the wheels of cars .  and a host of bodies simply strewn like pitiful discarded dolls along the sides of the road  their limbs frozen in the grotesque attitudes of death .  siferra said   probably some drivers stopped right away  when the stars came out .  but others speeded up  trying to get off the highway and head for home  and went piling into the cars that had stopped .  and still other people were so dazed they forgot how to drive altogether look  they went right off the edge of the road over there  and this one here must have turned around and tried to drive back through the oncoming traffic   theremon shuddered .   a horrendous colossal pileup .  cars crashing in from all sides at once .  spinning around  turning over  flung right across the road to the opposite lanes .  people getting out  running for cover  getting hit by other cars just arriving .  everything gone crazy in fifty different ways .   he laughed bitterly .  siferra said in surprise   what can you possibly find to laugh about  theremon .    only my own foolishness .  do you know  siferra  a wild idea crossed my mind half an hour ago  as we were getting close to the highway  that we could just sit down in somebody s abandoned car and find it fueled up and ready to go  and drive ourselves off to amgando .  just like that  convenient as could be .  i didn t stop to think that the road would be totally blocked  that even if we were lucky enough to find a car we could use  we wouldn t be able to drive so much as fifty feet in it    it ll be hard enough just to walk along the road  in the shape it s in .    yes .  but we ll have to .   grimly  they set out on their long journey south .  by the warm onos light of early afternoon they picked their way through the carnage of the highway  scrambling over the twisted and battered wreckage of the cars  trying hard to ignore the charred and mutilated bodies  the dried pools of blood  the reek of death  the total horror of it all .  theremon felt himself growing desensitized to it almost at once .  perhaps that was an even greater horror .  but after a short while he simply stopped noticing the gore  the staring eyes of the corpses  the vastness of the disaster that had taken place here .  the task of clambering over mountainous heaps of shattered cars and squeezing himself past dangerous jutting masses of jagged metal was so exacting that it required all his concentration  and he quickly ceased to pay attention to the victims of the debacle .  he already knew there was no point in searching for survivors .  anyone who had been trapped here this many days would surely have died of exposure by now .  siferra too seemed to have quickly adapted to the nightmare scene that was the great southern highway .  scarcely saying a word  she picked her way through the obstacles alongside him  now pausing to point to an opening in the tangle of debris  now dropping to her hands and knees to crawl under some overhang of crumpled metal .  they were virtually the only living people using the road .  now and then they caught sight of someone moving southward on foot far ahead of them  or even coming up out of the south heading toward the saro city end of the road  but there were never any encounters .  the other wayfarers would hastily duck down out of sight and lose themselves in the wreckage  or  if they were up ahead  would begin frantically to scramble forward at a pace that spoke of terrible fear  disappearing quickly in the distance .  what are they afraid of .  theremon wondered .  that we ll attack them .  is everyone s hand lifted against everyone else  now .  once  an hour or so from their starting point  they saw a bedraggled looking man going from car to car  reaching in to fumble in the pockets of the dead  despoiling the bodies of their possessions .  there was a great sack of loot on his back  so heavy that he was staggering under the weight of it .  theremon cursed angrily and pulled out his needle gun .   look at the filthy ghoul .  look at him .    no  theremon .   siferra deflected his arm just as theremon fired a bolt at the looter .  the shot struck a nearby car  and for a moment set up a glittering sunburst of reflected energy .   why did you do that .   theremon asked .   i was only trying to scare him .    i thought that you   bleakly theremon shook his head .   no   he said .   not yet  anyway .  there look at him run .   the looter had swung around at the sound of the shot  staring in berserk manic astonishment at theremon and siferra .  his eyes were blank  a trail of spittle dribbled from his lips .  he gaped at them for a long moment .  then  dropping his sack of booty  he went scrabbling away in a wild  desperate flight over the tops of the cars and soon was lost from view .  they went onward .  it was slow  dreadful going .  the road signs that rose high above them on shining stanchions mocked their pitiful progress by telling them what a very small distance from the beginning of the highway they had succeeded in traversing so far .  by onos set they had gone only a mile and a half .   at this rate   theremon said somberly   it ll take us close to a year to reach amgando .    we ll move faster as we get the knack of it   said siferra  without much conviction .  if only they could have followed along some street parallel to the highway  instead of having to walk on the roadbed itself  it would all have been much simpler for them .  but that was impossible .  much of the great southern highway was an elevated road  rising on lofty pillars above wooded tracts  areas of marsh  and the occasional industrial zone .  there were places where the highway became a bridge across long open patches of mining scars  or over lakes and streams .  for most of the distance they would have no choice but to stick to what had once been the central traffic lanes of the highway itself  difficult as it was to get around the unending array of wreckage .  they kept to the edge of the roadbed as much as they could  since the density of wrecked cars was lower there .  looking over into the districts below  they saw signs of continuing chaos everywhere .  burned houses .  fires still raging after all this time  stretching to the horizon .  occasional little bands of forlorn refugees  looking stunned and dazed  straggling bewilderedly through the debris choked streets bound on some hopeless  desperate migration .  sometimes a larger group  a thousand people or more  camped together in some open place  everyone huddled in a desolate  paralyzed looking way  scarcely moving  their wills and energies shattered .  siferra pointed to a burned out church at the crest of a hill just across from the highway .  a small group of ragged looking people were scrambling over its tumbled walls  prying at the remaining blocks of gray stone with crowbars  pulling them loose and hurling them into the courtyard .   it looks as though they re demolishing it   she said .   why would they do that .   theremon said   because they hate the gods .  they blame them for everything that happened .   do you know the pantheon  the big cathedral of all the gods just at the edge of the forest  with the famous thamilandi murals .  i saw it a couple of days after nightfall .  it had been burned down just rubble  everything destroyed  and one half conscious priest sticking out of a pile of bricks .  now i realize that it was no accident that it burned .  that fire was deliberately set .  and the priest i saw a crazy kill him right before my eyes  and i thought it was to steal his vestments .  maybe not .  maybe it was out of mere hatred .    but the priests didn t cause    have you forgotten the apostles so soon .  mondior  telling us for months that what was going to happen was the vengeance of the gods .  the priests are the voice of the gods  isn t that so  siferra .  and if they led us into evil  so that we needed to be punished this way  why  the priests themselves must be responsible for the coming of the stars .  or so people would think .    the apostles .   siferra said darkly .   i wish i could forget them .  what do you think they re doing now .    came through the eclipse safe and sound in their tower  i suppose .    yes .  they must have made it through the night in good shape  prepared for it as they were .  what was it altinol said .  that they were already operating a government on the north side of saro city .   theremon stared gloomily at the devastated church across the way .  tonelessly he said   i just can imagine what sort of government that will be .  virtue by decree .  mondior issuing new commandments of morality every onos day .  all forms of pleasure prohibited by law .  weekly public executions of the sinful .   he spat into the wind .   by darkness .  to think i had folimun right within my reach that evening and let him go  when i could so easily have throttled him    theremon .    i know .  what good would it have done .  one apostle  more or less .  let him live .  let them set up their government  and tell everyone who s unlucky enough to live north of saro city what to do and what to think .  why should we care .  we re heading south  aren t we .  what the apostles do won t affect us .  they ll be just one of fifty rival squabbling governments  when things have a chance to settle down .  one of five thousand  maybe .  every district will have its own dictator  its own emperor .   theremon s voice darkened suddenly .   oh  siferra  siferra   she took his hand .  quietly she said   you re accusing yourself again  aren t you .    how did you know that .    when you get yourself so worked up .   theremon  i tell you you re not guilty of anything .  this would have happened no matter what you wrote in the paper  can t you see .  one man alone couldn t have made any difference .  this is something the world was destined to go through  something that couldn t have been prevented  something    destined .   he said sharply .   what a weird word for you to use .  the vengeance of the gods  is that what you mean .    i didn t say anything about gods .  i mean only that kalgash two was  destined to come  not by the gods but simply by the laws of astronomy  and the eclipse was destined to happen  and nightfall  and the stars    yes   theremon said indifferently .   i suppose .   they walked onward  through a stretch of road where very few cars had come to rest .  onos was down now  and the evening suns were out  sitha and tano and dovim .  a chilly wind blew from the west .  theremon felt the dull ache of hunger rising in him .  they had not taken time to eat all day .  now they halted  camping between two crumpled cars  and unpacked some of the packages of dried food they had brought with them from the sanctuary .  but  hungry as he was  he found that he had little appetite  and he had to force the meal down mouthful by mouthful .  the rigid faces of corpses were staring at him from the nearby cars .  while he was on the move he had been able to ignore them  but now  sitting here on what had once been saro province s finest highway  he could not screen the sight of them from his mind .  there were moments when he felt that he had murdered them all himself .  they built a bed from seat cushions that had been thrown from colliding cars  and slept close together  a fitful scattered sleep  which could not have been much worse had they tried to sleep on the hard concrete roadbed itself .  during the evening came shouts  hoarse laughter  the distant sound of singing .  theremon awoke once and peered over the edge of the elevated highway  and saw distant campfires in a field down there  perhaps twenty minutes  march off to the east .  did anyone ever sleep under a roof any more .  or had the impact of the stars been so universal  he wondered  that the whole population of the world had turned itself out of house and home  to camp in the open as he and siferra were doing  beneath the familiar light of the eternal suns .  toward dawn he finally dozed .  but hardly had he fallen asleep when onos came up  pink and then golden in the east  pulling him out of fragmentary  terrifying dreams .  siferra was already awake .  her face was pale  her eyes were reddened and puffy .  he managed a smile .   you look beautiful   he told her .   oh  this is nothing   she said .   you ought to see me when i ve gone without washing for two weeks .    but i meant    i know what you meant   she said .   i think .   that day they covered four miles  and it was difficult going for them  every step of the way .   we need water   siferra said  as the afternoon wind began to rise .   we ll have to take the next exit ramp we see  and try to find a spring .    yes   he said .   i guess we ll have to .   theremon felt uneasy about descending .  since the beginning of the journey they had had the highway virtually to themselves  and by now he had come to feel almost at home  in a strange sort of way  amid the tangle of crushed and ruined vehicles .  down there  in the open fields where the bands of refugees were moving odd  he thought  bow i call them refugees  as though i m simply off on some sort of holiday myself there was no telling what sort of trouble they would get into .  but siferra was right .  they had to go down and find water .  the supply that they had brought with them was all but exhausted .  and perhaps they needed some time away from the hellish unending strip of demolished cars and stiff  staring corpses before they resumed their march toward amgando .  he pointed to a road sign a short way in front of them .   half a mile to the next exit .    we should be able to get there in an hour .    less   he said .   the road looks pretty clear up ahead .  we ll get ourselves down from the highway and do what we need to do  as fast as we can  and then we d better get back up here to sleep .  it s safer to bed down out of sight between a couple of these cars than to take our chances in the open fields .   siferra saw the logic of that .  in this relatively uncluttered stretch of the road they moved quickly toward the upcoming exit ramp  traveling faster than they had in covering any previous section of the highway .  in hardly any time at all they came to the next road sign  the one that gave quarter mile warning of the exit .  but then their rapid progress was sharply checked .  they found the roadbed blocked at that point by so immense a pileup of crashed cars that theremon feared for a moment that they would not be able to get through at all .  there must have been some truly monstrous series of crashes here  something dreadful even by the standards of what he and siferra had already passed through .  two huge transport trucks seemed to be in the middle of it  interlocked face to face like two warring beasts of the jungle  and it appeared that dozens of passenger cars had come barreling into them  flipping up on end  falling back on those who followed them  building a gigantic barrier that reached from one side of the road to the other and outward over the railings at the road s margins .  crumpled doors and fenders  sharp as blades  stuck out everywhere  and acres of broken glass set up a sinister tinkling as the wind played over it .   here   theremon called .   i think i see a way up through this opening  and then over the left hand truck no  no  that won t work  we ll have to go under   siferra came up alongside him .  he showed her the problem  a cluster of up ended cars waiting for them on the far side  like a field of upturned knives and she nodded .  they went underneath instead  a slow  dirty  painful crawl through shards of glass and clotted pools of fuel .  midway through they paused to rest before continuing through to the far side of the pileup .  theremon was the first to emerge .   gods .   he muttered  staring in bewilderment at the scene that lay before him .   what now .   the road was open for perhaps fifty feet on the far side of the great mass of wreckage .  beyond the clear space a second roadblock lay across the highway from one side to the other .  this one  though  had been deliberately constructed a heap of car doors and wheels neatly piled on the roadbed to a height of eight or nine feet .  in front of the barricade theremon saw some two dozen people  who had set up a campsite right on the highway .  he had been so intent on getting through the tangle of wreckage that he had paid no attention to anything else  and so he had not heard the sounds from the other side .  siferra came crawling out beside him .  he heard her gasp of surprise and shock .   keep your hand on your needler   theremon said quietly to her .   but don t pull it out and don t even think of trying to use it .  there are too many of them .   a few of the strangers were sauntering up the road toward them now  six or seven brawny looking men .  theremon  motionless  watched them come .  he knew that there was no turning back from this encounter no hope of escape through that maze of knife sharp wreckage through which they had just wriggled .  he and siferra were trapped in this clearing between the two roadblocks .  all they could do was wait to see what happened next  and hope that these people were reasonably sane .  a tall  slouch shouldered  cold eyed man came unhurriedly up to theremon until they were standing virtually nose to nose  and said   all right  fellow .  this is a search station .   he put a peculiar emphasis on the word search .   search station .   theremon repeated coolly .   and what is it that you re searching for .    don t get wise with me or you ll find yourself going over the edge head first .  you know damned well what we re searching for .  don t make trouble for yourself .   he gestured to the others .  they moved in close  patting theremon s clothes and siferra s .  angrily theremon pushed the questing hands away .   let us pass   he said tightly .   nobody goes through here without search .    by whose authority .    by my authority .  you going to let us  or we going to have to make you .    theremon   siferra whispered uneasily .  he shook her off .  rage was rising in him .  reason told him that it was folly to try to resist  that they were badly outnumbered  that the tall man wasn t fooling around when he said there d be trouble for them if they refused to submit to the search .  these people didn t exactly seem to be bandits .  there was something official sounding about the tall man s words  as though this were some kind of boundary  a customs station  perhaps .  what were they searching for .  food .  weapons .  would these men try to take the needle guns from them .  better to give them everything they were carrying  theremon told himself  than to be killed in a vain and foolishly heroic attempt at maintaining their freedom of passage .  but still to be manhandled like this to be forced to submit  on a free public highway  and they couldn t afford to give up the needle guns  or their food supply .  it was still hundreds of miles to amgando .   i warn you   the tall man began .   and i warn you  keep your hands away from me .  i m a citizen of the federal republic of saro and this is still a road freely open to all citizens  no matter what else has happened .  you have no authority over me .    he sounds like a professor   one of the other men said  laughing .   making speeches about his rights  and all .   the tall man shrugged .   we ve already got our professor here .  we don t need any more .  and this is about enough talk .  grab them and put them through search .  top to bottom .    let go  of me   a hand clutched at theremon s arm .  he brought his fist up quickly and jammed it forward into someone s ribs .  this all seemed very familiar to him  another scuffle  another beating in store for him .  but he was determined to fight .  an instant later someone hit him in the face and another man caught him by the elbow  and he heard siferra cry out in fury and fear .  he tried to pull free  hit someone again  was hit again himself  ducked  swung  took a sharp stinging blow in the face   hey  wait a second .   a new voice called .   hold on .  butella  get away from that man .  fridnor .  talpin .  let go of him .   a familiar voice .  but whose .  the searchers stepped back .  theremon  swaying a little  struggled to keep his balance as he looked at the newcomer .  a slender  wiry  intelligent looking man  grinning at him  keen bright eyes peering out of a dirt stained face  someone he knew  yes .   beenay .    theremon .  siferra .    in a moment everything was changed .  beenay led theremon and siferra to a surprisingly cozy looking little nest just on the far side of the roadblock  cushions  curtains  a row of canisters that appeared to contain foodstuffs .  a slim young woman was lying there  her left leg swathed in bandages .  she looked weak and feverish  but she flashed a brief faint smile as the others entered .  beenay said   you remember raissta      don t you  theremon .  raissta  this is siferra     of the department of archaeology .  i told you about her her discovery of previous episodes of city burning in the remote past .   raissta is my contractmate   he said to siferra .  theremon had met raissta a few times over the past couple of years  in the course of his friendship with beenay .  but that had been in another era  in a world that was dead and vanished now .  he could barely recognize her .  he remembered her as a slender  pleasant looking  nicely dressed woman who seemed always well groomed  always agreeably turned out .  but now  now .  this gaunt  frail  haggard girl this hollow eyed stringyhaired ghost of the raissta he had known  .  had it really been only a few weeks since nightfall .  it seemed like years ago  suddenly .  it seemed like eons several geological epochs ago beenay said   i have a little brandy here  theremon .   theremon s eyes widened .   are you serious .  do you know how long it s been since i ve had a drink .   how ironic  beenay .  you  the teetotaler who i had to coax into taking his first sip of a tano special you ve got the last bottle of brandy in the world hidden away here with you .    siferra .   beenay asked .   please .  just a little .    just a little is all we have .   he poured three thimble sized drinks for them .  theremon said  as the brandy began to warm him   beenay  what s going on out there .  this search business .    you don t know about search .    not a thing .    where have you two been since nightfall .    in the forest  mostly .  then siferra found me after some hoodlums beat me up  and took me to the university sanctuary while i recovered from what they did to me .  and for the past couple of days we ve been trekking down the highway here  hoping to get to amgando .    so you know about amgando  do you .    by way of you  at one remove   theremon said .   i ran into sheerin in the forest .  he was at the sanctuary right after you must have left it  and he saw your note about amgando .  he told me  i told siferra .  and we set out together to go there .    with sheerin .   beenay asked .   where is he  then .    he isn t with us .  he and i split up days ago he went off to amgando by himself  and i stayed in saro to look for siferra .  i don t know what happened to him .   do you think i could have another little nip of this brandy  beenay .  if you could spare it .  and you were starting to tell me about search .   beenay poured a second small drink for theremon .  he looked toward siferra  who shook her head .  then he said uneasily   if sheerin was traveling alone  he s probably in trouble  probably very serious trouble .  he certainly hasn t come this way since i ve been here  and the great southern highway is the only route out of saro that anybody could take if he hoped to get to amgando .  we ll have to send out a scouting party to look for him .   as for search  it s one of the new things that people do .  this is an official search station .  there s one at the beginning of every province that the great southern highway runs through .    we re only a few miles from saro city   theremon said .   this is still saro province  beenay .    not any more .  all the old provincial governments have disappeared .  what s left of saro city s been divided up i hear that the apostles of flame have one big chunk of it  over on the far side of town  and the area around the forest and the university is under the control of somebody named altinol  who s operating a quasi military group that calls itself the fire patrol .  perhaps you ve run into them .   siferra said   i was an officer in the fire patrol for a few days .  this green neckerchief i m wearing is their official badge of office .   beenay said   then you know what s happened .  fragmentation of the old system a million petty governmental units springing up like mushrooms everywhere .  what you re in now is restoration province .  it runs from here down the highway about seven miles .  when you get to the next search station  you re in six suns province .  beyond that is godland  and then daylight  and after that well  i forget .  they change every few days  anyway  as people wander on to other places .    and search .   theremon prompted .   the new paranoia .  everyone s afraid of fire starters .  you know what they are .  crazies who thought that what happened at nightfall was a load of fun .  they go around burning things down .  i understand that a third of saro city burned down the night of the eclipse  just from people s panicky wild attempts to drive away the stars  but that another third of it has been destroyed since then  even though the stars are long gone again .  a sick business  that is .  so the people who are more or less intact of mind you re among some now  in case you were wondering are searching everyone for fire lighting equipment .  it s forbidden to possess matches  or mechanical lighters  or needleguns  or anything else capable of    the same thing s going on on the outskirts of the city   siferra said .   that s what the fire patrol is all about .  altinol and his people have set themselves up as the only people in saro who are allowed to use fire .    and i was attacked in the forest while i was trying to cook a meal for myself   said theremon .   i suppose they were searchers too .  i d have been beaten to death if siferra and her patrol hadn t come along to rescue me in the nick of time  pretty much the same way you did just now .    well   beenay said   i don t know who you ran into in the forest .  but search is the formal ritual down here to deal with the same problem .  it goes on everywhere  everybody searching everybody else  never any let up .  suspicion is universal  nobody s exempt .  it s like a fever a fever of fear .  only little elites  like altinol s fire patrol  can carry combustibles .  at every border you have to surrender your fire making apparatus to the authorities  such as they may happen to be at the moment .  you might as well leave those needle guns here with me  theremon .  you ll never get to amgando with them .    we ll never get there without them   theremon said .  beenay shrugged .   maybe  maybe not .  but you won t be able to avoid surrendering them as you continue south .  the next time you hit search  you know  i won t be there to call off the search force .   theremon considered that .   how is it that you were able to make them listen to you  anyway .   he asked .   or are you the head searcher here .   with a laugh beenay said   the head searcher .  hardly .  but they respect me .  i m their official professor  you see .  there are places where university people are loathed  do you know that .  killed on sight by mobs of crazies  because the crazies think we caused the eclipse and are getting ready to cause another one .  but not here .  here i m considered useful for my intelligence  i can compose diplomatic messages to adjoining provinces  i ve got ideas about how to take broken things and make them work again  i can even explain why the darkness isn t going to come back and why nobody will have to look at the stars again for two thousand years .  they find that very comforting to hear .  so i ve settled in among them .  they feed us and take care of raissta  and i think for them .  it s a nice symbiotic relationship .    sheerin told me you were going to amgando   said theremon .   i was   beenay said .   amgando s the place where people like you and me ought to be .  but raissta and i ran into some trouble on the way down .  did you hear me tell you that crazies are hunting down university people and trying to kill them .  we nearly got caught by a bunch of them ourselves  as we were heading south through the suburbs toward the highway .  all those neighborhoods on the south side of the forest are occupied by wild squatters now .    we ran into some   theremon said .   then you know .  we were surrounded by a bunch of them .  they could tell just by the way we talked that we had to be educated people  and then someone recognized me recognized me  theremon  from a picture in the newspaper  from one of your columns  one of the times when you were interviewing me about the eclipse .  and he said i was from the observatory  i was the man who had made the stars appear .   beenay stared off into nowhere for a moment .   we were about two minutes away from being strung up from a lamppost  is my guess .  but then came a providential distraction .  another gang showed up territorial rivals  i suppose throwing bottles  yelling  waving kitchen knives around .  raissta and i were able to get away .  they re like children  the crazies they can t keep their minds on any one thing very long .  but as we were crawling through a narrow path between two burned out buildings raissta cut her leg on some broken glass .  and by the time we got this far south on the highway it was so badly infected that she couldn t walk .    i see .   no wonder she looks so terrible  theremon thought .   luckily for us  restoration province s border guards were in need of a professor .  they took us in .  we ve been here a week  or maybe ten days  now .  i figure raissta may be able to travel again in another week if all goes well  or more likely two .  and then i ll have the boss of this province write out a passport for us that might get us safely through the next few provinces down the road  at least  and we ll set out on our way for amgando .  you re welcome to stay here with us until then  and then we can all go south together  if you like .  certainly it ll be safer that way .   you want me  butella .   the tall man who had tried to search theremon in the clearing had poked his head over the curtains of beenay s little den .   messenger just came in  professor .  brought some news from the city  by way of imperial province .  we can t make much sense out of it .    let me see   beenay said  reaching up and taking a folded slip of paper from the man .  to theremon he said   messengers go back and forth between the various new provinces all the time .  imperial s north and east of the highway  stretching up toward the city itself .   most of these searchers here aren t too good at reading .  their exposure to the stars seems to have damaged their verbal centers  or something .   beenay fell silent as he began to scan the message .  he scowled  frowned  pursed his lips  muttered something about post nightfall handwriting and spelling .  then after a moment his expression grew dark .   good god .   he cried .   of all the rotten  miserable  terrible   his hand was shaking .  he looked up at theremon  wildeyed .   beenay .  what is it .   somberly beenay said   the apostles of flame are coming this way .  they ve assembled an army  and they re going to march down to amgando  clearing away all the new little provincial governments that have sprung up along the highway .  and when they get to amgando they re going to smash whatever reconstituted governing body it is that has taken form down there and proclaim themselves the only legally empowered ruling force in all of the republic .   theremon felt siferra s fingers digging into his arm .  he turned to look at her and saw the horror on her face .  he himself must not look very different  he knew .   coming this way   he said slowly .   an army of apostles .    theremon  siferra you ve got to get out of here   said beenay .   immediately .  if you re still here when the apostles arrive  everything s lost .    go to amgando  you mean .   theremon asked .   absolutely .  without wasting another minute .  the whole university community that was in the sanctuary is down there  and people from other universities  educated people from all over the republic .  you and siferra have to warn them to scatter  fast .  if they re still in amgando when the apostles get there  mondior will be able to gobble up the whole nucleus of any future legitimate government this country s likely to have  all in one swoop .  he might even order mass executions of university people .   look  i ll write out passports for you that ll get you through the next few search stations down the line  anyway .  but when you ve gotten beyond our authority  you ll simply have to submit to search and let them take whatever they want from you  and then keep on heading south .  you can t afford to let yourself be distracted by secondary issues like resisting search .  the amgando group has to be warned  theremon .    and what about you .  are you just going to stay here .   beenay looked puzzled .   what else can i do .    but when the apostles come    when the apostles come  they ll do what they want with me .  are you suggesting that i leave raissta behind and run off to amgando with you .    well no    then i have no choice .  right .  right .  here i stay  with raissta .   theremon s head began to ache .  he pressed his hands against his eyes .  siferra said   there s no other way  theremon .    i know .  i know .  but all the same  to think of mondior and his crew taking a man as valuable as beenay prisoner executing him  even   beenay smiled and rested his hand for a moment on theremon s forearm .   who knows .  maybe mondior would like to keep a couple of professors around as pets .  anyway  what happens to me is unimportant now .  my place is with raissta .  your place is on the road scampering down to amgando as fast as you know how .  come on  i ll get you a meal  and i ll give you some official looking documents .  and then on your way with you .   he paused .   here .  you ll need this  too .   he poured the rest of the brandy  no more than an ounce or so  into theremon s empty glass .    down the hatch   he said .   at the boundary between restoration province and six suns they had no trouble at all getting through search .  a border official who looked as though he might have been an accountant or a lawyer in the world that no longer existed simply glanced at the passport beenay had written out  nodded when he saw the florid  beenay     inscription at the bottom  and waved them on through .  two days later  when they were crossing from six suns province into godland  it wasn t that simple .  here the border patrol looked like a gang of cutthroats  who would just as soon toss theremon and siferra over the side of the elevated highway as look at their papers at all .  there was a long uneasy moment as theremon stood there  dangling the passport like some sort of magic wand then the magic worked  more or less .   this thing a safe through .   the head cutthroat asked .   a passport  yes .  exemption from search .    who from .    beenay     chief search administrator  restoration province .  that s two provinces up the road .    i know where restoration province is .  read it to me .     to whom it may concern  this is to attest that the bearers of this document  theremon     and siferra     are properly accredited emissaries of the fire patrol of saro city  and that they are entitled to    the fire patrol .  what s that .    altinol s bunch   one of the other cutthroats murmured .   ah .   the head man nodded toward the needle guns that theremon and siferra wore in full view at their hips .   so altinol wants you to go marching off through other people s countries carrying weapons that could set a whole district on fire .   siferra said   we re on an urgent mission to the people at amgando national park .  it s vital that we get there safely .   she touched her green neckerchief .   you know what this means .  what we do is to keep fires from starting  not to start them .  and if we don t get to amgando on time  the apostles of flame will come marching down this highway and destroy everything you people are trying to create .   it didn t make a lot of sense  theremon thought .  their getting to amgando  far to the south  wasn t going to save the little republics at the northern end of the highway from the apostles but siferra had put just the right note of conviction and passion into her speech to make it all sound very significant  in a jumbled sort of way .  the response was silence  for a moment  while the border patrolman tried to figure out what she was talking about .  then an irritated frown and a perplexed glare and then  suddenly  almost impetuously   all right .  go on through .  get the hell out of here  and don t let me see you anywhere inside six suns province again  or we ll make you regret it .   apostles .  amgando .    thank you very much   said theremon  with a graciousness bordering so closely on sarcasm that siferra took him by the arm and steered him quickly through the checkpoint before he could get them into real trouble .  they were able to move quickly in this stretch of the highway  covering a dozen or more miles a day  sometimes even more .  the citizens of the provinces that called themselves six suns and godland and daylight were hard at work  clearing the debris that had littered the great southern highway since nightfall .  barricades of rubble were set up at regular intervals  nobody was going to be driving the great southern highway again for a long  long time  theremon thought but between checkpoints it was possible now to walk at a steady clip  without having to crawl and creep around mounds of hideous wreckage .  and the dead were being taken from the highway and buried  too .  bit by bit  things were beginning to seem almost civilized again .  but not normal .  not even remotely normal .  there were few fires now to be seen still burning in the hinterlands flanking the highway  but burned out towns were visible all along the route .  refugee camps had been set up every mile or two  and as they walked briskly along the elevated road theremon and siferra could look down and see the sad  bewildered people of the camps moving slowly and purposelessly about in them as if they had all aged fifty years in that one single terrible night .  the new provinces  theremon realized  were simply strings of such camps linked together by the straight line of the great southern highway .  in each district local strongmen had emerged who had been able to put together a little realm  a petty kingdom that covered six or eight or ten miles of the highway and spread out for perhaps a mile on either side of the roadbed .  what lay beyond the eastern and western borders of the new provinces was anybody s guess .  no radio or television communications seemed to be in existence .   wasn t there any kind of emergency planning at all .   theremon asked  speaking more to the air than to siferra .  but it was siferra who answered him .   what athor was predicting was altogether too fantastic for the government to take seriously .  and it would have been playing into mondior s hands to admit that anything like the collapse of civilization could happen in just one short period of darkness  especially a period of darkness that could be predicted so specifically .    but the eclipse    yes  maybe some people in high office were capable of looking at the diagrams and really did believe that there was going to be an eclipse .  and a period of darkness as a result .  but how could they anticipate the stars .  the stars were simply the fantasy of the apostles of flame  remember .  even if the government knew that something like the stars was going to happen  no one could predict the impact the stars would have .    sheerin could   theremon said .   not even sheerin .  he didn t have an inkling .  it was darkness that was sheerin s specialty not sudden unthinkable light filling the whole sky .    still   theremon said .   to look around at all this devastation  all this chaos you want to think that it was unnecessary  that it could have been avoided  somehow .    it wasn t avoided  though .    it better be  the next time .   siferra laughed .   next time is two thousand and forty nine years away .  let s hope we can leave our descendants some kind of warning that seems more plausible to them than the book of revelations seemed to most of us .   turning  she stared back over her shoulder  peering apprehensively at the long span of highway they had covered in the past few days of hard marching .  theremon said   afraid you ll see the apostles thundering down the road behind us .    aren t you .  we re still hundreds of miles from amgando  even at the pace we ve been going lately .  what if they catch up with us  theremon .    they won t .  a whole army can t possibly move as quickly as two healthy and determined people .  their transport isn t any better than ours one pair of feet per soldier  period .  and there are all sorts of logistic considerations that are bound to slow them down .    i suppose .    besides  that message said that the apostles are planning to stop at each new province along the way to establish their authority .  it s going to take them plenty of time to obliterate all those stubborn little petty kingdoms .  if we don t run into any unexpected complications ourselves  we ll be at amgando weeks ahead of them .    what do you think will happen to beenay and raissta .   siferra asked  after a time .   beenay s a pretty clever boy .  i suspect he ll work out some way of making himself useful to mondior .    and if he can t .    siferra  do we really need to burn up our energies worrying ourselves over horrible possibilities that we can t do a damned thing about .    sorry   she said sharply .   i didn t realize you d be so touchy .    siferra    forget it   she said .   maybe i m the touchy one .    it ll all work out   said theremon .   beenay and raissta aren t going to be harmed .  we ll get down to amgando in plenty of time to give the warning .  the apostles of flame won t conquer the world .    and all the dead people will rise up and walk again  too .  oh  theremon  theremon   her voice broke .   i know .    what will we do .    we ll walk fast  is what we ll do .  and we won t look back .  looking back doesn t do any good at all .    no .  none at all   said siferra .  and smiled  and took his hand .  and they walked quickly onward in silence .  it was amazing  theremon thought  how swiftly they were going  now that they had hit their stride .  the first few days  when they were coming down out of saro city and picking their way through the wreckage strewn upper end of the highway  progress had been slow and their bodies had protested bitterly against the strains that they were imposing on them .  but now they were moving like two machines  perfectly attuned to their task .  siferra s legs were nearly as long as his own  and they walked along side by side  muscles working efficiently  hearts pumping steadily  lungs expanding and contracting in flawless rhythm .  stride stride stride .  stride stride stride .  stride stride stride  hundreds of miles yet to go  sure .  but it wouldn t take long  not at this pace another month  perhaps .  perhaps even less the road was almost completely clear  down here in the rural regions beyond the farthest edge of the city .  there hadn t been nearly as much traffic here in the first place as there had been to the north  and it looked as though many of the drivers had been able to get off the highway safely even while the stars were shining  since they were in less danger of being struck by the cars of other drivers who had lost control .  there were fewer checkpoints  too .  the new provinces in these sparsely populated areas covered much greater areas than those up north  and their people seemed less concerned with such things as search .  theremon and siferra underwent serious interrogation only twice in the next five days .  at the other border points they were simply waved on through without even having to show the papers beenay had provided for them .  even the weather was on their side .  it was fair and mild almost every day  a few little rain showers now and then but nothing that caused serious inconvenience .  they would walk for four hours  pause for a light meal  walk another four  eat again  walk  stop for six hours or so of sleep taking turns  one sitting up and watching for a few hours  then the other and then get up and march onward .  like machines .  the suns came and went in the sky in their age old rhythm  now patru and trey and dovim up above  now onos and sitha and tano  now onos and dovim  now trey and patru  now four suns at once  the unending succession  the great pageant of the skies .  theremon had no idea how many days had passed since they had left the sanctuary the whole idea of dates  calendars  days  weeks  months it all seemed quaint and archaic and cumbersome to him  something out of a former world .  siferra  after her spell of brooding and apprehensiveness  became cheerful again this was going to be a breeze they would make it down to amgando with no trouble at all they were passing through a district known as spring glen now or perhaps it was called garden grove  they had heard several different names from the people they encountered along the road .  it was farm country  open and rolling  and there was little sign here of the hellish devastation that had blighted the urbanized regions  an occasional fire damaged barn  or a herd of farm animals that seemed to be roaming unattended  and that was about the worst of it .  the air was sweet and fresh  the light of the suns was bright and strong .  but for the eerie absence of vehicular traffic on the highway  it was possible here to think that nothing extraordinary had happened at all .   are we halfway to amgando yet .   siferra asked .   not quite .  i haven t seen a road sign for a while  but my guess is that   he stopped abruptly .   what is it  theremon .    look .  look there  to the right .  along that secondary road coming in from the west .   they peered over the edge of the highway .  down below  a few hundred yards away  a long row of trucks was drawn up at the side of the secondary road  where it fed into an approach to the main one .  there was a large  bustling camp there  tents  a big campfire burning  some men chopping logs .  two or three hundred people  perhaps .  all of them in black hooded robes .  theremon and siferra exchanged astounded glances .   apostles .   she whispered .   yes .  get down .  hands and knees .  hide yourself against the railing here .    but how did they manage to get this far south so fast .  the highway s upper end is completely blocked .   theremon shook his head .   they didn t take the highway at all .  look there they ve got trucks that work .  here s another one  coming right now .  gods  that looks strange  doesn t it  an actual moving vehicle .  and hearing the sound of an engine again after all this time .   he felt himself beginning to shiver .   they were able to keep a fleet of trucks undamaged  and a supply of fuel .  and obviously they ve come down from saro around through the west  on little country roads .  now they re joining up with the main highway  which i suppose is open from here to amgando .  they could be there by this evening .    this evening .  theremon  what are we going to do .    i m not sure .  there s only one wild chance  i guess .   what if we went down there and tried to seize one of those trucks .  and drove it to amgando ourselves even if we got there only two hours ahead of the apostles  there d be time for most of the amgando people to escape .  right .   siferra said   perhaps .  it sounds crazy  though .  how could we steal a truck .  the moment they see us  they ll know we aren t apostles  and they ll grab us .    i know .  i know .  let me think .   after a moment he said   if we could catch a couple of them at a distance from the others  and take their robes away from them shoot them with our needlers  if we have to and then  when we re robed  just walk up to one of the trucks as though we have every right to be doing that  and jump on board and drive off toward the highway    they d follow after us in two minutes .    maybe .  or maybe if we were calm and cool about it they d think it was something perfectly ordinary  part of their plan  and by the time they realized it wasn t  we d be fifty miles down the road .   he looked at her eagerly .   what do you say  siferra .  what other hope do we have .  continue toward amgando on foot  when for us it ll be a journey of weeks and weeks  and they can drive past us in a couple of hours .   she was staring at him as though he had lost his mind .   overpower a couple of apostles hijack one of their trucks go zooming off toward amgando oh  theremon  it ll never work .  you know that .    all right   he said abruptly .   you stay here .  i ll try to do it alone .  it s the only hope there is  siferra .   he rose to a half crouch  and began to scuttle along the side of the highway toward the exit ramp a few hundred yards ahead .   no wait  theremon   he looked back at her and grinned .   coming .    yes .  oh  this is crazy .    yes   he said .   i know .  but what else can we do .   she was right  of course .  the scheme was crazy .  yet he saw no alternative .  evidently the report beenay had received had been garbled  the apostles had never intended to move down the great southern highway province by province  but instead had set out directly for amgando in a huge armed convoy  taking minor roads which  though not very direct  were at least still open to vehicular transport .  amgando was doomed .  the world would fall by default to mondior s people .  unless unless  he had never imagined himself as a hero .  heroes were people he wrote about in his column people who functioned at the top of their form under extreme circumstances  performing strange and miraculous deeds that the ordinary individual would never dream of even attempting  let alone of carrying off .  and now here he was in this strangely transformed world  blithely talking of overpowering hooded cultists with his needle gun  commandeering a military truck  speeding off to amgando park to sound the warning of the oncoming attack  crazy .  utterly crazy .  but perhaps it might just work  simply because it was so crazy .  nobody would be expecting two people to appear out of thin air down here in this peaceful bucolic setting and simply run off with a truck .  they edged their way down the highway ramp  theremon a short distance in the lead .  a thickly overgrown field lay between them and the camp of the apostles .   maybe   he whispered   if we get down and wriggle through the tall grass here  and a couple of the apostles come wandering out this way for some reason  we can rise up and jump them before they know what s happening .   he got down .  he wriggled .  siferra went right after him  keeping pace .  ten yards .  twenty .  just keep going  head down and wriggle  over to that little knoll  and then wait wait  a voice said suddenly  just behind him   what do we have here .  a couple of peculiar serpents  is it .   theremon turned  looked  gasped .  gods .  apostles  seven or eight of them .  where had they come from .  a private picnic in the field .  which he and siferra had crawled right past  all unknowing .   run for it .   he barked to her .   you go this way i ll go that   he began to sprint to his left  toward the towers that supported the highway .  maybe he could outrun them disappear into the wooded country on the other side of the road  no .  no .  he was strong and fast  but they were stronger  faster .  he saw them coming up alongside him .   siferra .   he yelled .   keep going .  keep going .   perhaps she had actually made it to safety .  he couldn t see her now .  the apostles were all around him .  he reached for his needle gun  but one of them caught his arm immediately  and another got him by the throat .  the gun was yanked from his hand .  legs poked between his  entangling him  tripping him .  he fell heavily  rolled over  looked up .  five hooded faces  unsmiling  rigid  looked back .  one of the apostles had his own needle gun aimed at his chest .   get up   the apostle said .   slowly .  with your hands in the air .   awkwardly theremon stumbled to his feet .   who are you .  what are you doing here .   the apostle demanded .   i live around here .  my wife and i were just taking a shortcut through these fields  back to our house    the nearest farm is five miles away .  a very long shortcut .   the apostle gestured with a nod of his head toward the camp .   come with us .  folimun will want to talk to you .   folimun .  so he had survived the night of the eclipse after all .  and was in charge of the expedition against amgando .  theremon glanced around .  no sign of siferra at all .  he hoped she was back on the highway by now  heading for amgando as fast as she could go .  a slim hope  but the only one left .  the apostles marched him toward the camp .  it was a weird sensation to be among so many hooded figures .  scarcely any of them paid attention to him  though  as his captors nudged him along  into the largest of the tents .  folimun was seated at a bench near the back of the tent  looking through a sheaf of papers .  he turned his chilly blue eyes on theremon and his thin  sharp face softened for an instant as a smile of surprise crossed it .   theremon .  you here .  what are you doing covering us for the chronicle .    i m traveling south  folimun .  taking a little holiday  since things are a little unsettled back in the city .  would you mind asking these thugs of yours to let go of me .    release him   folimun said .    where are you heading  exactly  eh .    that s of no importance to you .    let me be the judge of that .  going to amgando  are you  theremon .   theremon offered the cultist a cold level stare .   i don t see any reason why i should tell you anything .    after all that i told you  when you interviewed me .    very funny .    i want to know where you re heading  theremon .   stall  theremon thought .  stall him as long as you can .   i decline to answer that question  or any other you might happen to have for me .  i ll discuss my intentions only with mondior himself   he said in a steady  determined tone .  folimun made no reply for a moment .  then he smiled again  a quick on off .  and then  suddenly  unexpectedly  he broke into actual laughter .  theremon wondered if he had ever seen folimun laugh before .   mondior .   folimun said  his eyes glinting with amusement .   there is no mondior  my friend .  there never was .    it was hard for siferra to believe that she had actually managed to escape .  but that was indeed what appeared to have happened .  most of the apostles who had surprised them in the field had gone after theremon .  looking back once  she had seen them surrounding him like hunters  hounds surrounding their prey .  they had knocked him down  he would certainly be captured .  only two of the apostles had split off to pursue her .  siferra had jabbed one in the face  hard  with the flat of her hand at the end of her stiff outstretched arm  and at the speed she was traveling the impact had sent him reeling to the ground .  the remaining one was fat and ungainly and slow  in moments siferra left him far behind .  she doubled back the way she and theremon had come  toward the elevated highway .  but it seemed unwise to go up onto it .  the highway was too easily blocked  and there was no safe way down from it except at the exit ramps .  she would only be putting herself at risk of running into a trap if she went up there .  and even if no roadblocks lay ahead  it would be a simple thing for the apostles to come after her in their trucks and pick her up  a mile or two down the way .  no  the thing to do was to run into the woods on the far side of the road .  the apostles  trucks wouldn t be able to follow her there .  she could lose herself easily enough in those low shrubby trees  and hide there until she had figured out her next move .  and what could that be .  she wondered .  she had to admit that theremon s idea  wild as it was  still was their only hope  steal a truck somehow  drive down to amgando and sound the alarm before the apostles could get their army on the move again .  but siferra knew there wasn t the remotest chance that she could simply tiptoe up to an empty truck  jump in  and drive it away .  the apostles weren t that stupid .  she d have to order one of them at gunpoint to switch the truck on for her and surrender its controls to her .  and that involved carrying out the whole bizarre maneuver of trying to overpower a stray apostle  getting his robe  slipping into the camp  locating someone who could open up one of the trucks for her  her heart sank .  it was all too implausible .  she might just as well consider trying to rescue theremon while she was at it  go marching in with her needle gun blazing  take hostages  demand his immediate release oh  it was absolute foolishness  a silly melodramatic dream  a gaudy maneuver out of some cheap children s adventure book  but what will i do .  what will i do .  she huddled down in a copse of tightly woven little trees with long feathery leaves and waited for time to pass .  the apostles gave no sign of breaking camp  she could still see the smoke of their bonfire against the twilight sky  and their trucks were still parked where they had been along the road .  evening was coming on .  onos was gone from the sky .  dovim hovered on the horizon .  the only suns overhead were her two least favorite ones  bleak and cheerless tano and sitha  casting their cold light from their distant location at the edge of the universe .  or what people had thought was the edge of the universe  rather  in those far off innocent days before the stars appeared and revealed to them just how immense the universe really was .  the hours ticked interminably by .  no solution to the situation made sense to her .  amgando seemed lost  unless someone else had managed to get a warning to them certainly there was no way she was going to get down there ahead of the apostles .  rescuing theremon was an absurd idea .  her chances of stealing a truck and getting to amgando by herself was only slightly less preposterous .  what then .  simply sit back and watch while the apostles took command of everything .  there seemed to be no alternative .  at one point during the evening she thought that the only path open to her was to walk into the apostles  camp  surrender  and ask to be imprisoned with theremon .  at least they would be together then .  it astonished her how much she missed him .  they had not been out of each other s company in weeks  she who had never lived with a man in her life .  and all during the long journey from saro city  though they had bickered now and then  even quarreled a little  she had never tired of being with him .  not once .  it had seemed the most natural thing in the world for them to be together .  and now she was alone again .  go on  she told herself .  give yourself up .  everything s lost anyway  isn t it .  it grew darker .  clouds veiled sitha and tano s frosty light  and the sky turned so dusky that she half expected the stars to reappear .  go ahead  she thought bitterly .  come out and shine .  drive everyone crazy all over again .  what harm can it do .  the world can only be smashed once  and that s been done already .  but the stars  of course  did not appear .  veiled as they were  tano and sitha nevertheless afforded enough light to mask the glow of those distant points of mysterious brilliance .  and as the hours went by  siferra found herself swinging completely around from her mood of total defeatism to a new sense of almost reckless hope .  when all is lost  she told herself  there s nothing left to lose .  under cover of this evening gloom she would slip into the apostles  camp and somehow  somehow take one of their trucks .  and rescue theremon  too  if she could manage it .  and then off to amgando .  by the time onos was in the sky tomorrow morning  she d be down there  among her university friends  in plenty of time to let them know that they had to scatter before the enemy army arrived .  all right  she thought .  let s go .  slowly slowly more cautiously than before  just in case they have sentries hidden in the grass  out of the woods .  a moment of uncertainty  there  she felt tremendously vulnerable  now that she had left the safety of that tangle of shrubbery behind .  but the dimness still protected her .  across the cleared place  now  that led from the woods to the elevated highway .  under the great metal legs of the roadbed and into the unkempt field where she and theremon had been surprised that afternoon .  get down and wriggle  now  the way they had before .  once again across the field looking this way and that  scanning for sentries who might be on duty at the perimeter of the apostles  camp  her needle gun was in her hand  set for minimum aperture  the sharpest  most highly focused  deadliest beam the gun could produce .  if anyone came upon her now  so much the worse for him .  there was too much at stake to worry about the niceties of civilized morality .  while still half out of her mind she had killed balik in the archaeology lab  not meaning to  but he was dead all the same  and  a little to her surprise  she found herself quite ready to kill again  this time intentionally  if circumstances required it of her .  the important thing was to get a vehicle and get out of here and carry the news of the apostles  army s approach to amgando .  everything else  including considerations of morality  was secondary .  everything .  this was war .  onward .  head down  eyes raised  body hunched .  she was only a few dozen yards from the camp now .  it was very silent over there .  probably most of them were asleep .  in the murky grayness siferra thought she could see a couple of figures on the far side of the main bonfire  though the smoke rising from the fire made it difficult to be sure .  the thing to do  she thought  was to slip into the deep shadows behind one of the trucks and toss a rock against a tree some distance away .  the sentries would probably investigate  and if they fanned out separately  she could slip up behind one of them  jab the needler into his back  warn him to keep quiet  make him strip off his robe  no  she thought .  don t warn him of anything .  just shoot him  quickly  and take his robe  before he can call out an alarm .  these are apostles  after all .  fanatics .  her own newfound cold bloodedness amazed her .  onward .  onward .  she was almost at the nearest truck now .  into the darkness on the side opposite the campfire .  where s a rock .  here .  here  this is a good one .  shift the needler to the left hand for a moment .  now  toss the rock at that big tree over there  she raised her arm to make the throw .  and in that moment she felt a hand seize her left wrist from behind and a powerful arm clamp across her throat .  caught .  shock and outrage and a jolt of maddening frustration went coursing through her .  furiously siferra lashed out with her foot  kicking backward with all her strength  and connecting .  she heard a grunt of pain .  not enough to break the man s strong grip  though .  twisting halfway around  she kicked again  and attempted at the same time to pass the needle gun from her left hand to her right .  but her assailant pulled her left arm upward in a short  sharp  agonizing gesture that numbed her and sent the needler spilling out of her hand .  the other arm  the one that was pressing against her throat  tightened to choking intensity .  she coughed and gasped .  darkness .  of all the stupidity  to let someone sneak up on her while she was sneaking up on them .  tears of rage burned her cheeks .  in fury she kicked backward again  and then again .   easy   a deep voice whispered .   you could hurt me that way  siferra .    theremon .   she said  astounded .   who do you think it is .  mondior .   the pressure at her throat eased .  the hand that clutched her wrist released its grasp .  she took a couple of tottering steps forward  fighting for breath .  then  numb with confusion  she swung around to stare at him .   how did you get free .   she asked .  he grinned .   a holy miracle  it was .  an absolute holy miracle .   i watched you the whole time  coming from the woods .  you were very good  really .  but you were concentrating so hard on getting here unnoticed that you didn t notice me circling around behind you .    thank all the gods it was you  theremon .  even if you did give me the shock of my life when you grabbed me .   but why are we standing here .  quick  let s grab one of those trucks and clear out of here before they see us .    no   he said .   that isn t the plan any more .   she gave him a blank look .   i don t understand .    you will .   to her amazement he clapped his hands and called loudly   over here  fellows .  here she is .    theremon .  are you out of your   the beam of a flashlight struck her in the face with an impact nearly as devastating as the one the stars had had .  she stood blinded  shaking her head in bewilderment and consternation .  there were figures moving all around her  but it was another moment before her eyes adapted sufficiently to the sudden brightness for her to make them out .  apostles .  half a dozen of them .  she glared accusingly at theremon .  he seemed calm  and very pleased with himself .  her dazed mind could barely begin to accept the awareness that he had betrayed her .  when she tried to speak  nothing but blurted monosyllables would emerge .   but why .  what .    theremon smiled .   come on  siferra .  there s someone i want you to meet .    folimun said   there s not really any need to glower at me like that  dr .  siferra .  you may have trouble believing it  but you are among friends here .    friends .  you must think i m a very gullible woman .    not at all .  quite the contrary .    you invade my laboratory and steal priceless research materials .  you order your horde of berserk superstitious followers to invade the observatory and wreck the equipment with which the university astronomers are trying to perform unique  essential research .  now you hypnotize theremon into doing your bidding  and send him out to capture me and turn me over to you as a prisoner .  and then you tell me that i m among friends .   theremon said quietly   i haven t been hypnotized  siferra .  and you aren t a prisoner .    of course not .  and this is all just a very bad dream  too  nightfall  the fires  the collapse of civilization  the whole thing .  an hour from now i ll wake up in my apartment in saro city and everything will be just the way it was when i went to sleep .   theremon  facing her across the middle of folimun s tent  thought that she had never looked more beautiful than she did right then .  her eyes were luminous with anger .  her skin seemed to glisten .  there was an aura of intensely focused energy about her that he found irresistible .  but this was hardly the moment to tell her anything like that .  folimun said   for stealing your tablets  dr .  siferra  i can only offer my apologies .  it was a shameless act of theft  which i assure you i never would have authorized except that you made it necessary .    i made it    you did .  you insisted on keeping them in your possession  on placing those irreplaceable relics of the previous cycle in jeopardy at a time when chaos was about to break loose and  for all you knew  the university buildings were going to be destroyed down to the last brick .  we saw it as essential that they be placed in safekeeping  that is to say  in our own hands  and since you would not authorize that we found it necessary to take them from you .    i found those tablets .  you d never have known they existed if i hadn t dug them up .    which is beside the point   folimun said smoothly .   once the tablets were discovered  they became vital to our needs to humanity s needs .  we felt that the future of kalgash was more important than your personal proprietary interest in your artifacts .  as you will see  we have translated the tablets fully now  making use of the ancient textual material already available to us  and they have added greatly to our understanding of the extraordinary challenges that civilized life on kalgash must periodically confront .  dr .  mudrin s translations were  unfortunately  extremely superficial .  but the tablets provide an accurate and convincing version  uncorrupted by centuries of textual alteration and error  of the chronicles that have come down to us under the name of the book of revelations .  the book of revelations  i must confess  is full of mysticism and metaphor  adopted for propagandistic purposes .  the thombo tablets are straightforward historical accounts of two separate advents of the stars thousands of years ago  and of the attempts made by the priesthoods of the time to warn the populace of what was about to happen .  we can demonstrate now that throughout history and prehistory on kalgash  small groups of dedicated people have struggled again and again to prepare the world for the disruption that repeatedly falls upon it .  the methods they used  obviously  were insufficient to the problem .  now at last  aided as we are by a knowledge of past mistakes  we will be able to spare kalgash from another devastating upheaval when the present year of godliness comes to its end two thousand years from now .   siferra turned to theremon .   how smug he sounds .  justifying his own burglary of my tablets by telling me that they ll enable him to set up an even more efficient theocratic dictatorship than they had hoped .  theremon  theremon  why did you sell me out like this .  why did you sell us out .  we could have been halfway to amgando by this time  if only   folimun said   you ll be in amgando tomorrow afternoon  dr .  siferra  i assure you .  all of us will be in amgando by tomorrow afternoon .    what will you do .   she asked hotly .   march me in chains at the rear of your conquering army .  tie me up and make me walk in the dust behind mondior s chariot .   the apostle sighed .   theremon  explain things to her  if you please .    no   she said .  her eyes were blazing .   you poor brainwashed ninny  i don t want to hear the gibberish this maniac has poured into your mind .  i don t want to hear anything from any of you .  let me alone .  lock me up  if you like .  or turn me loose  if you can bring yourself to do it .  i can t possibly harm you  can i .  one woman against a whole army .  i can t even cross a field without having someone come up and surprise me from behind .   theremon  dismayed  reached toward her .   no .  keep away from me .  you disgust me .   but it isn t your fault  is it .  they ve done something to your mind .   you ll do it to me too  won t you  folimun .  you ll make me into an obliging little puppet .  well  let me ask just this one favor .  don t force me to wear an apostle s robe .  i can t stand the idea of walking around inside one of those ridiculous things .  take my soul away  if you have to  but let me dress as i please  all right .  all right  folimun .   the apostle laughed faintly .   perhaps it would be best if i left the two of you alone .  i see that nothing s going to be accomplished so long as i m part of the conversation .   siferra cried   no  damn you  i don t want to be left alone with   but folimun had already risen and walked quickly from the tent .  theremon turned toward siferra  who backed away from him as though he were carrying some plague .  softly he said   i wasn t hypnotized  siferra .  they haven t done anything to my mind .    of course you d say that .    it s true .  i ll prove it to you .   she stared at him bleakly  coldly  making no response .  very quietly he said  after a moment   siferra  i love you .    how long did it take the apostles to program that line into you .   she asked .  he winced .   don t .  don t .  i mean it  siferra .  i won t try to tell you that i ve never said those words to anyone before .  but this is the first time i ve meant them .    oldest line in the book   said siferra derisively .   i suppose i deserve that .  theremon the ladies  man .  theremon the seducer about town .  well  all right .  forget i said it .   no .  no .  i m serious  siferra .  traveling with you these past weeks being with you morning and afternoon and evening  there hasn t been a moment when i haven t looked at you and thought to myself  this is the woman i was waiting for all these years .  this is the woman i never dared to imagine i would find .    very touching  theremon .  and the best way you could find to show your love was to grab me from behind  practically breaking my arm in the process  and turn me over to mondior .  right .    mondior doesn t exist  siferra .  there s no such person .   for an instant he saw a flicker of surprise and curiosity cut through her hostility .   what .    he s a convenient mythical construct  put together by electronic synthesis to make speeches on television .  no one s ever had an audience with him  have they .  he s never been seen in public .  folimun invented him to be a public spokesman .  since mondior never appears in person  he can be on television in five different countries at once  all over the world nobody could ever be sure where he really was  and so he could be displayed simultaneously .  fohimun s the real boss of the apostles of flame .  he simply masquerades as a public relations officer .  in fact he calls all the shots  and has for the past ten years .  before that there was someone named bazret  who s dead now .  bazret was the one who invented mondior  but fohimun s brought him to his present eminence .    folimun told you all this .    he told me some .  i guessed the rest  and he confirmed it .  he ll show me the mondior apparatus when we re back in saro city .  the apostles plan to restore television transmissions in another few weeks .    all right   siferra said harshly .   the discovery that mondior s a fake so overwhelmed you with its slimy cleverness that you decided on the spot that you absolutely had to join up with folimun s outfit .  and your first assignment was to turn me in .  so you skulked around looking for me  and took me by surprise  and thereby made certain that the people down in amgando would fall into folimun s clutches .  nicely done  theremon .    folimun s heading for amgando  yes   theremon said .   but he doesn t intend to harm those who have gathered there .  he wants to offer them posts in the new government .    gods almighty  theremon  do you believe    yes .  yes  siferra .   theremon held his hands out  fingers spread wide in an agitated gesture .   i may be a mere coarse journalist  but at least grant me that i m no fool .  twenty years in the newspaper business has made me an excellent judge of character  at the very least .  folimun impressed me in a strange way from the first time i met him .  he seemed very much the opposite of crazy  very complex  very sly  very sharp .  and i ve been talking with him for the past eight hours .  nobody s been sleeping here this evening .  he s laid his whole plan bare .  he s shown me his entire scheme .  would you grant  for the sake of argument  that it s possible for me to get an accurate psychological reading on someone during the course of an eight hour conversation .    well   she said grudgingly .   either he s completely sincere  siferra  or he s the best actor in the world .    he could be both .  that still doesn t make him someone we d want to trust .    maybe not .  but i do .  now .    go on .    folimun is a totally ruthless  almost monstrously rational man who believes that the only thing that s of any real importance is the survival of civilization .  because he s had access  through his age old religious cult  to historical records of previous cycles  he s known for many years what we ve all just learned in the hardest possible way  that kalgash is doomed to be shown a view of the stars once every two thousand years and that the sight of them is so overwhelming that it ll shatter ordinary minds and give even the strongest ones a bad time for days or weeks .   he s willing to let you see all their ancient documents  by the way  when we re back in saro city .    saro city has been destroyed .    not the part of it controlled by the apostles .  they made damned well sure nobody would be setting any fires within a mile of their tower on all sides .    very efficient of them   siferra said .   they re efficient people .  all right  folimun knows that in a time of total madness the best hope of pulling things together is a religious totalitarianism .  you and i may think the gods are just old fables  siferra  but there are millions and millions of people out there  believe it or not  who have a different view of things .  they ve always been uneasy about doing things that they consider sinful  for fear the gods will punish them .  and now they have an absolute dread of the gods .  they think the stars might come back tomorrow  or the day after tomorrow  and finish off the job .   well  here are the apostles  who claim a direct pipeline to the gods and have all sorts of scriptural passages to prove it .  they re in a better position to set up a world government than altinol  or the little provincial overlords  or the fugitive remnants of the former governments  or anyone else .  they re the best hope we have .    you re serious   siferra said in wonder .   folimun hasn t hypnotized you  theremon .  you ve managed to do it to yourself .    look   he said .   folimun s been working all his life toward this moment  knowing that his is the generation of apostles on whom the responsibility for ensuring survival will fall .  he s got all sorts of plans .  he s well on his way to establishing control over enormous territories north and west of saro city  and next he s going to take charge of the new provinces along the line of the great southern highway .    and establish a theocratic dictatorship that will begin its rule by executing all the atheistic  cynical  materialistic university people like beenay and sheerin and me .    sheerin s already dead .  folimun told me his people found his body in a ruined house .  he was apparently killed some weeks back by a band of anti intellectual crazies .   siferra looked away  unable for a moment to meet theremon s eyes .  then she stared at him more angrily than before and said   there you are .  first folimun sends his goons crashing into the observatory athor was killed too  wasn t he .   and then he eliminates poor harmless sheerin .  and then all the rest of us will be    he was trying to protect the observatory people  siferra .    he didn t go about it very well  did he .    things got out of hand .  what he wanted to do was rescue all the scientists before the rioting started but because he was operating under the guise of a wild eyed fanatic  he had no way of persuading them to hear what he was offering  which was to give them safe conduct to the apostles  sanctuary .    after the observatory was wrecked .    that wasn t his first choice either .  the world was crazy that night .  things didn t always follow his scheme .    you re very good at making excuses for him  theremon .    maybe so .  hear me out  anyway .  he wants to work with the surviving university people  and the other sane and intelligent ones who have gathered at amgando  to rebuild humanity s pool of knowledge .  he or the supposed mondior  rather  will be in charge of the government .  the apostles will keep the unstable and superstition ridden populace pacified by religious domination  at least for a generation or two .  meanwhile the university people will help the apostles assemble and codify the knowledge they ve managed to save  and together they ll guide the world back to a rational state as has happened so many times before .  but this time  perhaps  they ll be able to begin the preparations for the next eclipse a hundred years or so in advance  and head off the worst of the upheaval  the mass insanity  the torchings  the universal devastation .    and you believe all this .   siferra asked .  there was the bite of acid in her voice .   that it makes sense to stand back and applaud while the apostles of flame spread their poisonous irrational totalitarian creed throughout the world .  or what s even worse that we should join forces with them .    i hate the idea   theremon said suddenly .  siferra s eyes widened .   then why  .    let s go outside   he said .   it s almost dawn .  give me your hand .    well    it wasn t just a line  when i told you i love you .   she shrugged .   one thing has nothing to do with another .  the personal and the political  theremon you re using one to muddle the other .    come   he said .   they stepped from the tent .  the early light of onos was a pink glow on the eastern horizon .  high overhead  tano and sitha had emerged from the clouds  and the twin suns  now at their zenith  had a radiance that was strange and wonderful to behold .  there was one more .  far off in the north the small hard red sphere that was the little sun dovim was shining like a tiny ruby set in the forehead of the sky .   four suns   theremon said .   a sign of luck .   all about them in the apostles  camp there was the bustle of activity .  the trucks were being loaded  the tents were coming down .  theremon caught sight of folimun far across the other side  directing a team of workers .  the apostle leader waved to theremon  who nodded in return .   you hate the idea that the apostles will rule the world   siferra said   and yet you re still willing to give your allegiance to folimun .  why .  what sense does that make .   quietly theremon said   because there s no other hope .    is that what you think .   he nodded .   it began to sink in  after folimun had been talking with me for a couple of hours .  every rational instinct in me tells me not to trust folimun and his crew of fanatics .  whatever else he may be  there s no doubt that folimun s a power hungry manipulator  very ruthless  very dangerous .  but what other chance is there .  altinol .  all the petty little bosses along the highway .  it could take a million years to weld all the new provinces into a global economy .  folimun s got the authority to make the whole world kneel to him or to mondior  rather .   listen  siferra  most of mankind is lost in madness .  there are millions of crazies loose out there now .  only strongminded ones like you and me and beenay have been able to recover  or very stupid ones  but for the others  the mass of humanity  it ll be months or years or never before they can think straight again .  a charismatic prophet like mondior  much as i loathe the idea  may be the only answer .    no other option  then .    not for us  siferra .    why not .    look  siferra  i believe that what matters is healing .  everything else is secondary to that .  the world has suffered a terrible wound  and    has inflicted a terrible wound on itself .    that s not how i see it .  the fires were a response to a vast change of circumstances .  they never would have happened if the eclipse hadn t yanked our curtain away and shown us the stars .   but the wounds go on and on .  one leads to another  now .  altinol is a wound .  these new little independent provinces are wounds .  the crazies killing each other in the forest  or hunting down fugitive university professors are wounds .    and folimun .  he s the biggest wound of all .    yes and no .  of course he s peddling fanaticism and mysticism .  but there s discipline there .  people believe in what he s selling  even the crazies  even the ones with sick minds .  he s a wound so big he can swallow all the others .  he can heal the world  siferra .  and then from within we can try to heal what be has done .  but only from within .  if we join him  we stand a chance .  if we set ourselves up in opposition  we ll be swept aside like fleas .    what are you saying  then .    we have our choice between rallying behind him and becoming part of the ruling elite that will bring the world back from insanity  or becoming wanderers and outlaws .  which do you want  siferra .    i want a third choice .    there isn t any .  the amgando bunch doesn t have the force of will to form a workable government .  people like altinol don t have the scruples .  folimun already controls half of what used to be the federal republic of saro .  he s certain to prevail over the rest .  it ll be centuries before the reign of reason returns  siferra  regardless of what you and i do .    so you say it s better to join him  and try to control the direction in which the new society goes  than to oppose him simply because we don t like the kind of fanaticism he represents .    exactly .  exactly .    but to cooperate in handing the world over to religious fanaticism    the world has made its way up from religious fanaticism before  hasn t it .  the important thing now is to find some way out of the chaos .  folimun and his crew offer the only visible hope of that .  think of their faith as a machine that ll drive civilization  at a time when all the other machinery is broken .  that s the only thing that counts now .  first fix the world  then hope our descendants will get tired of the mystical fellows in the robes and hoods .  do you see what i m saying  siferra .  do you .   she nodded in a strange  vague way  as though she were responding in her sleep .  theremon watched as she walked slowly away from him  toward the clearing where they had been surprised by the sentries of the apostles the evening before .  it seemed like years ago .  she stood a long while by herself there  in the light of the four suns .  how beautiful she looks  theremon thought .  how i love her .  how strange this all has turned out to be .  he waited .  all about him the breakup of the apostles  camp was reaching a pitch of activity  robed and hooded figures running back and forth past him .  folimun came over .   well .    we re thinking it over   theremon said .   we .  i had the impression you were with us  no matter what .   theremon eyed him steadily .   i m with you if siferra is .  otherwise no .    whatever you say .  we d hate to lose a man with your skills at communication  though .  not to mention dr .  siferra s expertise with the artifacts of the past .   theremon smiled .   let s see how skillful i ve been at communicating just now  eh .   folimun nodded and walked away  back to the trucks that were being loaded .  theremon looked toward siferra .  she was facing the east  toward onos  while the light of sitha and tano descended on her in a dazzling stream from above  and out of the north came the slender red spear of dovim s beam .  four suns .  the best of omens .  siferra was coming back  now  trotting across the field .  her eyes were shining  and she seemed to be laughing .  she came running up to him .   well .   theremon asked .   what do you say .   she took his hand in hers .   all right  theremon .  so be it .  almighty folimun is our leader  and i will follow him withersoever he telleth me to go .  with one condition .    go on .  what is it .    the same one i mentioned when we were in his tent .  i won t wear the robe .  i absolutely will not .  if he insists on the robe  the deal is off .   theremon nodded happily .  it was going to be all right .  after nightfall came daybreak  and rebirth .  out of the devastation a new kalgash would rise  and he and siferra would have a voice  a powerful voice  in creating it .   i think that can be arranged   he replied .   let s go talk to folimun and see what he says .        